Title: Ai2-Kit: Streamlining AI-Accelerated Ab Initio Workflows for Complex Chemical Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.00613v1

Published Time: Thu, 02 Jul 2026 00:43:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Ai2-Kit: Streamlining AI-Accelerated Ab Initio Workflows for Complex Chemical Systems 

Sheng Bi 1,2,5 , Wei-Hong Xu 1,5 , Yong-Bin Zhuang 1,5 , Jia-Xin Zhu 1,5 , Jiang-Peng Qiu 1,5 ,Yu-Hang Tang 1,5 , Xiang-Long Du 1,5 , Qi You 1,5 , Yun-Pei Liu 1,5 , Fu-Qiang Gong 1,5 , Yu-Xin Guo 1,5 , Yi-Ze Wang 1,5 , Cheng-Xuan Wang 1,5 , Zi-Heng Gong 1,5 , Zi-Qiang Chen 1,5 , Chang Liu 3,5 ,Si-Yuan Han 1,5 , Jian Gu 1,5 , Jia-Xin Li 1,5 , Yi-Ming Chen 1,5 , Lin Huang 1,5 , Si-Jie Chen 1,5 ,Bo-Ying Huang 1,5 , Jie-Zhen Xia 1,5 , Fan-Jie Xu 3,5 , Su-Yang Zhong 1,5 , Peng-Wei Xu 3,5 , Jun-Yi Wang 1,5 , Xing-Yun Xie 1,5 , Yu-Lei Gong 3,5 , Yan-Yi Su 1,5 , Yue Liu 1,5 , Rui-Hao Bi 1,5 , Lang Li 1,5 ,Fei-Teng Wang 1,5 , Jing-Xiang Zou 1,5 , Mei Jia 1,5 , Jie-Qiong Li 1,5 , Min Lin 1,5 , Qi-Yuan Fan 1,5 ,Juan-Juan Sun 1,5 , Jia-Bo Le 1,5 , Zixuan Wei 1,5 , Jin-Yuan Hu 1,5 , Meng-Lei Jia 1,5 , Yan Sun 1,5 ,Xiao-Hui Yang 4,5,* , Fujie Tang 1,5,* , Feng Wang 1,5,* , and Jun Cheng 1,5,* 1State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, iChEM, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 

> 2

College of Materials, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 

> 3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. 

> 4

National Engineering Research Center of Chemicals for Electronic Manufacturing (Reconstruction), College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 

> 5

Laboratory of AI for Electrochemistry (AI4EC), IKKEM, Xiamen, China 

> *

Corresponding authors. E-mail: xiaohuiyang@xmu.edu.cn, tangfujie@xmu.edu.cn, fengwang@xmu.edu.cn, chengjun@xmu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Molecular simulations of complex chemical systems, such as catalysis, electrochemistry, and energy storage, often need to capture the interplay of effects such as electronic structure, finite-temperature fluctuations, and electric-field response. Such complexity is difficult to address with traditional ab initio calculations, which are limited by the time and length scales they can reach. AI-accelerated ab initio (AI 2) methods use machine learning poten-tials trained on first-principles data to replace expensive electronic-structure calculations, extending ab initio accuracy to these regimes, but their routine application requires reliable workflows that connect first-principles calculations, model training, molecular dynamics, enhanced sampling, trajectory analysis, and HPC orchestration. Here we present ai2-kit, a software toolkit for developing accessible, reproducible, and extensible AI 2 workflows. ai2-kit provides high-semantic-density command-line interfaces and Python APIs for structure and dataset conversion, batch task generation, active-learning screening, job orchestration, and workflow recovery. We demonstrate ai2-kit in four representative applications: active-learning-based machine learning potential construction, free-energy perturbation for redox and acid–base processes, electrochemical machine learning potentials for electrified interfaces, and spectroscopies from machine learning molecular dynamics. ai2-kit also provides AI-agent skills that help users adapt these use cases into customized workflows for their own chemical systems and computational software stacks. Together, ai2-kit helps turn AI 2 methods from bespoke computational protocols into reusable and extensible workflows for complex chemical systems, from model construction to property prediction. 

1

> arXiv:2607.00613v1 [physics.chem-ph] 1 Jul 2026

# Introduction 

Complex chemical systems are characterized by the strong coupling between atomic structure, electronic response, and the surrounding environment across multiple time and length scales. 1;2 

Such systems are central to many frontier areas in chemistry and materials science, including catalysis, electrochemistry, energy storage and conversion, and the design of functional materi-als. 3–6 In such systems, chemical behavior cannot be fully understood from a single optimized structure alone; it emerges from ensembles of configurations shaped by finite temperature, solvation, interfaces, electric fields, and chemical reactions. This complexity is reflected in the processes and observables used to characterize such systems, including proton and ion transfer in solution, 5;7–9 the structure and response of electric double layers, 4;10;11 and the vibrational spectra of confined or interfacial liquids. 12–15 Understanding these systems requires molecular simulations that can describe chemical bonding, charge redistribution, polarization, and finite-temperature sampling within a unified atomistic framework. Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) provides such a framework by evaluating electronic structure along finite-temperature trajectories, and has become indispensable for systems in which static electronic-structure calculations or empirical force fields are insufficient. 16;17 However, the cost of solving the electronic structure at every time step restricts direct AIMD to relatively small systems and short trajectories, limiting its ability to converge ensemble properties, sample rare events, and describe extended heterogeneous interfaces. 18 Machine learning molecular dynamics (MLMD) has emerged as a practical strategy for extending ab initio accuracy to longer time scales and larger system sizes. 19–21 In MLMD, machine learning potentials (MLPs) trained on ab initio reference data replace repeated electronic-structure calculations during molecular dynamics, preserving a direct connection to first-principles theory while greatly reducing the cost of sampling. In this work, we use the term AI-accelerated ab initio (AI 2) methods to refer broadly to computational workflows in which MLPs, together with related learned property models when needed, are trained on ab initio data to accelerate molecular simulation, free-energy sampling, electrochemical modeling, or property prediction. This includes MLMD based on MLPs and its extensions to free-energy calculations, electrochemical interface simulations, and AI-assisted spectroscopic prediction. This expanded reach is already changing what chemists study in practice. In heterogeneous catalysis, for example, AI 2-driven molecular dynamics is shifting the focus from static reaction energetics to finite-temperature free energies, revealing the effects of surface restructuring, adlayer reorganization, defect migration, and active-phase transitions, which are essential for reliable mechanistic interpretation and quantitative comparison with experiment. 22–25 

As AI 2 methods move from model systems to realistic chemical applications, the main bottleneck is no longer only the cost of electronic-structure calculations, but also the complexity of the computational workflow. 26;27 A practical AI 2 study typically requires iterative data generation, ab initio labeling, model training, configuration exploration, uncertainty estimation, configuration screening, relabeling, validation, and production simulation. 26;27 Advanced applications further multiply this complexity: free-energy calculations require multiple thermodynamic or alchemical states; electrochemical simulations require long-range electrostatics, electrode polarization, and often Wannier-center information; and spectroscopic predictions require learned dipoles, polarizabilities, or related response properties along long trajectories. Connecting these steps across electronic-structure codes, machine learning potential packages, molecular dynamics engines, enhanced-sampling tools, analysis scripts, and high-performance-computing schedulers usually demands substantial boilerplate code for file conversion, template generation, path management, job submission, checkpointing, error recovery, and post-processing. Existing workflow tools address important parts of this challenge, but a gap remains for complex AI 2 research. General-purpose engines such as Parsl, FireWorks, DFlow, and Snake-2make 28–31 provide powerful task orchestration and resource management, but do not encode the domain-specific operations that recur throughout computational chemistry workflows. Spe-cialized active-learning tools such as DPGEN and FLARE 26;27 have greatly advanced machine learning potential construction, but are primarily organized around specific workflow patterns and software ecosystems. The increasing diversity of AI 2 applications calls for a toolkit that combines chemistry-aware operations, concise user interfaces, restartable workflow execution, and extensibility across multiple backends and scientific scenarios. Here we present ai2-kit, a software toolkit designed to streamline AI 2 workflow development for complex chemical systems. ai2-kit provides high-semantic-density command-line interfaces and Python APIs for common computational-chemistry operations, including structure and dataset conversion, batch configuration generation, active-learning screening, job orchestration, and workflow recovery. Rather than enforcing a single rigid pipeline, ai2-kit exposes composable building blocks and provides ready-to-use workflow templates for representative applications, including machine learning potential training, free-energy perturbation, electrochemical machine learning potentials, and spectroscopic prediction. These templates are designed to be modified and extended, allowing users to develop customized AI 2 workflows for their own chemical systems, computational engines, and research objectives. In the following sections, we first describe the design principles and command-line/Python interfaces that give ai2-kit its high semantic density, and next introduce TESLA as its central active-learning workflow for MLP construction. We then demonstrate representative workflow templates for MLP training, free-energy perturbation, electrochemical machine learning poten-tials, and spectroscopy from MLMD, before discussing how ai2-kit supports workflow portability and extensibility across different software stacks and chemical applications. 

# Ai2-kit overview and theoretical background 

## Design philosophy and overview 

A practical AI 2 study for a complex chemical system rarely reduces to a single command. The researcher must combine an ab initio engine for high-accuracy reference data, a machine learning framework to train a potential, a molecular dynamics engine for exploration, often an enhanced-sampling layer to access rare events or alchemical states, and a chain of supporting scripts that convert formats between stages, generate batches of jobs, monitor cluster execution, and extract physical observables. Each new system or methodological choice typically forces fresh decisions at one or more of these points, so the dominant cost is not raw orchestration but iteration :turning a new physical idea into a running, validated workflow. Existing tools fall short of this. General-purpose workflow engines such as Parsl, FireWorks, DFlow, and Snakemake 28–31 provide solid task orchestration but no chemistry-specific operations, so one still needs to write every format conversion and parameter sweep themselves. Specialized active-learning toolkits such as DPGEN and FLARE 26;27 bundle a complete AI 2 pipeline behind a configuration interface but resist customization beyond their prescribed pattern; integrating a new ab initio engine, modifying the screening criterion, or trying a new sampling scheme usually means editing internal code. ai2-kit takes a different stance (Figure 1). Rather than aiming for full end-to-end automation, which is impractical given the diversity of AI 2 problems encountered in practice, we lower the cost of iteration by separating engineering plumbing from scientific intent. The plumbing consists of the recurring infrastructural operations every AI 2 workflow has to perform (data-format conversion, parameter combinatorics, batch job generation, cluster submission, state recovery) and is provided as a small set of composable command-line tools with matching Python APIs. The scientific intent (the potential to train, the sampling strategy to drive, how configurations are screened and labeled, how the trained model is coupled to downstream simulations) stays in 3a short, editable workflow script that the user owns. Adapting a workflow to a new system then means editing the script and a few input templates, not the underlying tools. 

Figure 1: High-level architecture flowchart of ai2-kit. Implemented as a Python package, ai2-kit exposes its functionality through a command-line interface and a matching Python API, and is internally organized as a three-tier stack in which each higher tier is a thin composition of the tier below. The bottom tier provides founda-tional utilities : data- and format-conversion primitives (built on ase and dpdata ) that bridge common ab initio engines (CP2K, VASP, ABACUS), molecular dynamics engines (LAMMPS, LAMMPS+PLUMED, JAX-MD, i-PI), and machine learning potential frameworks (DeepMD-kit, MACE, DeepMD-jax), 32–42 together with batch task generation and execution through 

oh-my-batch (omb ), a command-line tool distributed with the ai2-kit package that enumer-ates parameter combinations, instantiates input and launch templates, and submits jobs to SLURM, LSF, and OpenPBS schedulers with automatic retry and state recovery. The middle tier provides domain-specific operations : chemistry-aware functionality including model-deviation-and descriptor-based screening for active learning, Wannier-center processing for spectroscopic workflows, and electrochemical-interface labeling. The top tier provides higher-level workflows 

that compose the lower two tiers into the TESLA active-learning workflow described in the next subsection and its variants for free-energy perturbation, electrochemical machine learning potentials, and spectroscopy from machine learning molecular dynamics. A complementary skills layer further allows AI coding agents to adapt these workflows to new tasks. 

## Program structure 

ai2-kit realizes the design philosophy above through two interface conventions shared by all of its tools. Multi-files-in-and-out (MFI/O) lets a single command operate on a whole collection of files at once: inputs are specified by wildcards and outputs by template variables, replacing the explicit loops, path bookkeeping, and directory creation that dominate hand-written workflow scripts. 

Method chaining lets a sequence of dependent steps compose within a single command, using a dash ( -) as the separator in the command-line interface (CLI) or chained calls in Python, so a 4pipeline of reading, transforming, and writing data proceeds without intermediate variables or files. Together, MFI/O and method chaining give workflow code a natural-language density. A representative data-handling task that takes 17 lines of explicit Python without ai2-kit collapses to 4 lines in the ai2-kit CLI or 5 lines in the ai2-kit Python module, closely matching the line count of a natural-language description (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: Comparison of four ways to express the same computational task: reading all LAMMPS trajectories from ./lammps-*/ , randomly sampling 100 structures, and writing them as VASP POSCAR files in individual task folders. (a) Python implementation without ai2-kit (17 lines); (b) ai2-kit command-line interface (4 lines); (c) Python implementation with ai2-kit (5 lines); (d) natural-language description. The same compression carries over to workflow-level operations. Consider a canonical step from a TESLA active-learning workflow: enumerating combinations of trained potentials, initial structures, multiple temperatures and pressures, and unique random seeds, then generating both LAMMPS input files and submission scripts. The entire step fits in a single chained command:            

> omb combo \ add_files DATA_FILE ./lammps-data/* --abs -\ add_file_set DP_MODELS ./deepmd-*/compress.pb --abs -\ add_var TEMP 330 430 530 -\ add_var PRES 1 2 3 -\ add_randint SEED -n 10000 -a 0 -b 99999 --uniq -\ set_broadcast SEED -\ make_files ./lammps-{i}/ in .lammps --template in .lammps -\ make_files ./lammps-{i}/run.sh --template lmp-run.sh -\
> done

The hand-written equivalent would span tens of lines of nested loops and template substitution. The same interface pattern carries through the rest of the toolkit — ASE- and dpdata-based wrappers provide broad coverage of common atomic-structure and DFT-output formats, and 

omb batch / omb job package the generated tasks for SLURM, LSF, and OpenPBS schedulers with automatic retry ( --max_tries ) and state recovery ( --recovery ) on interruption. The full list of principal tools and their subcommands is documented in the ai2-kit GitHub repository (https://github.com/chenggroup/ai2-kit ). A complete TESLA-style workflow, comprising ab initio labeling, ensemble training, biased exploration, model-deviation screening, and dataset assembly, typically fits in 100–200 lines of shell script using ai2-kit (see examples in the Github repository). Adapting that skeleton to a 5new system, potential, or modality requires only localized edits to the high-level script and a few input templates; the underlying tools are not touched. Because the workflow scripts are short and self-describing, they also read naturally to modern coding agents, which we exploit in the section “Example-driven workflow distribution” as skills to further compress the cost of adapting workflows to new tasks. 

## TESLA: training–exploration–screening–labeling active-learning workflow 

The central workflow provided by ai2-kit is the TESLA (Training–Exploration–Screening– Labeling Active-learning) workflow, a closed-loop active learning framework for iteratively constructing training datasets and refining machine learning potentials. The TESLA workflow is an improved implementation of the DPGEN approach, redesigned with a more modular architecture and a semantic configuration system to support diverse AI 2 scenarios. 

Figure 3: Schematic of the TESLA active-learning workflow. Each iteration cycles through four stages — Training, Exploration, Screening, and Labeling — forming a closed active learning loop. 

Active learning loop. The TESLA workflow operates through iterative cycles, each consisting of four stages (Figure 3): 1. Training. Multiple MLP models (typically an ensemble of four) are trained on the current labeled dataset. The use of multiple models with different random initializations provides an estimate of prediction uncertainty in subsequent stages. Currently supported training backends include DeepMD-kit, MACE, and DeepMD-jax; adopting a different MLP architecture requires only editing the training template and the corresponding data-conversion command in the workflow script, which we illustrate with a MACE-based example in the section “Example-driven workflow distribution”. 2. Exploration. The trained models drive molecular dynamics simulations (or other struc-ture search methods) to sample the configuration space. During these simulations, the disagreement among ensemble members is recorded at each timestep as the model deviation. 3. Screening. Configurations generated during exploration are classified into three categories based on the maximum deviation of atomic forces predicted by the ensemble members, denoted σmax  

> f

:

• Accurate (σmax  

> f

< σ lo ): the model predictions are in good agreement and the configu-ration is considered well described. 6• Candidate (σlo ≤ σmax  

> f

< σ hi ): the model shows significant disagreement, indicating that this region of configuration space is insufficiently represented in the training data. These configurations are selected for labeling. 

• Failed (σmax  

> f

≥ σhi ): the deviation is too large, suggesting the configuration lies far outside the domain of applicability and could be unphysical or require special treatment. The thresholds σlo and σhi are user-specified trust levels. Optionally, candidate configu-rations can be further refined using descriptor-based clustering (SOAP descriptors with DBSCAN) to remove structurally redundant configurations and improve the diversity of the selected set. Beyond the committee-based model-deviation criterion, ai2-kit also supports lightweight uncertainty-quantification methods that operate on a single trained model and therefore avoid the cost of training and inferring with a committee, for example Last-Layer Prediction Rigidity (LLPR). 43;44 

4. Labeling. The selected candidate configurations are computed with ab initio methods (CP2K, VASP, ABACUS, etc.) to obtain reference energies and forces. These newly labeled data are appended to the training dataset for the next iteration. The workflow continues iterating until a convergence criterion is met, typically defined as the fraction of accurate configurations (the passing rate) exceeding a predetermined threshold, or until the maximum number of iterations is reached. At each iteration, the workflow configuration (training hyperparameters, exploration conditions, etc.) can be automatically updated through a walkthrough table, enabling staged training strategies such as progressively increasing the number of training steps or expanding the temperature range of exploration. 

# Results and discussion 

The ai2-kit provides ready-to-use workflow examples for a range of AI 2 scenarios commonly encountered in complex chemical studies. In this section, we present four representative appli-cations — MLP training, free energy perturbation, electrochemical interface simulation, and spectroscopy — demonstrating what ai2-kit can do and how researchers use it in practice. We then discuss how ai2-kit’s design enables easy cross-scenario migration and an extensible workflow ecosystem. 

## Training a machine learning potential with the TESLA workflow 

In modern atomistic molecular simulation, an accurate machine learning potential (MLP) is a prerequisite for studying a wide range of systems — from bulk liquids and crystalline solids to complex interfaces and disordered materials such as amorphous carbon. Because it is generally not known a priori which configurations are needed to sample the relevant regions of the potential energy surface, constructing such a potential can be efficiently done with the TESLA active-learning workflow described in the previous section. ai2-kit provides two ready-to-use entry points into this workflow — a self-contained shell-script example and a configuration-driven Python CLI — and supports commonly used MLP frameworks including DeepMD-kit, MACE, and DeepMD-jax. The shell-script example lives at example/use-case/tesla/ in the ai2-kit GitHub repos-itory and is implemented in approximately 130 lines of shell built around ai2-kit and the companion tool oh-my-batch . For a new system, the user can just place an AIMD trajectory at 00-config/aimd.xyz , edit the four template files under 00-config/ to specify the system’s 

type_map , atomic masses, and CP2K basis sets, and updates the three slurm-header.sh files to match the target cluster’s partitions and module environment. The full active-learning loop, 7three iterations each cycling through DeepMD training of four models, LAMMPS exploration at multiple temperatures, model-deviation screening, and CP2K labeling, is then launched with a single command: 

> ./run.sh

Each stage writes a .done sentinel as it completes, so an interrupted run simply resumes on re-invocation. Users who prefer a fully declarative setup can instead invoke the same active-learning loop through the Python CLI. The 64-water example documented in doc/manual/cll-workflow.md 

of the ai2-kit GitHub repository illustrates the pattern, in which the user specifies data paths, SSH/Slurm settings, model hyperparameters, and model-deviation thresholds step by step through a small set of YAML files; further details and the launch command are provided in the ai2-kit repository. We demonstrate the workflow on two chemically distinct systems: bulk water as a canonical benchmark, and an Au–CO 2 dynamic catalytic system as a more demanding case. 

Bulk water. As a widely adopted benchmark system in atomistic simulations, bulk water provides an ideal testbed to demonstrate the efficiency of ai2-kit . Using the TESLA workflow, we trained an MLP for this fundamental system (Figure 4a). Driven by the workflow’s active-learning strategy, training converged rapidly within just five iterations, requiring a remarkably small dataset of only ∼170 configurations. As shown in Figure 4b, the proportion of “accurate” configurations quickly stabilized near 100%, indicating efficient configurational-space exploration. The resulting MLP exhibits excellent structural fidelity, with the MLMD-derived O–O radial distribution function in close agreement with the AIMD reference (Figure 4c). The close agreement between MLP and DFT values on the training set indicates that the model has successfully learned the reference data. (Figure 4d, e). These results demonstrate that ai2-kit 

can fully automate the generation of reliable and transferable potentials for a canonical liquid with minimal data and computational cost. 

Figure 4: (a) Representative snapshot of the bulk water system. (b) Evolution of the model-deviation statistics during the TESLA workflow. (c) Radial distribution function (O–O) computed from MLMD (red dashed line) overlaid with the AIMD reference (black solid line). (d,e) Parity plots comparing the MLP-predicted (d) energies and (e) atomic forces against the DFT reference. The insets display their respective error distributions. 8Au–CO 2 catalysis. We next apply the workflow to a more chemically demanding system, catalysis on metal nanoclusters. As discussed in the introduction, the chemistry of such systems often depends not on static reaction energetics alone but on finite-temperature free energies that capture phenomena such as cluster restructuring and phase transitions of the active site. The Au–CO 2 system is a representative model for studying gold-based catalysis, focusing on the interactions of CO 2, CO, and oxygen with gold clusters. The relevant elementary processes include CO 2 adsorption and dissociation on the cluster surface, followed by surface diffusion of oxygen atoms and adsorbed CO molecules. These processes are closely related to CO oxidation and are central to understanding the activity and selectivity of gold catalysts. For sub-nanometer gold clusters, the cluster structures are strongly dynamic at finite temperature; adsorption and association of CO and oxygen can further alter the configurational evolution and phase-transition behavior of the clusters. 45 

Previous studies have shown that, within certain temperature ranges, different reaction states may correspond to distinct cluster structures and melting behavior, thereby changing the effective melting temperature of the system. 45;46 Because the solid-like and liquid-like phases have substantially different entropies, such phase transitions can strongly affect the free energy of CO 2 dissociation and produce an apparent free-energy jump near specific temperatures. The Au–CO 2 system therefore captures fundamental reaction processes in gold-based catalysis while also providing an ideal model for investigating dynamic catalytic effects in small metal clusters. Building on TESLA, ai2-kit provides a comprehensive example for this Au–CO 2 catalytic system, specifically targeting the dissociation of a single CO 2 molecule — the reverse of CO oxidation — catalyzed by a 38-atom Au cluster. The example includes TESLA workflow scripts and configuration templates for structural sampling and potential training, analysis scripts for evaluating the fitting accuracy of the trained potential, and post-processing scripts for computing both reaction and activation free energies (Figure 5). During the active-learning loop, the first five iterations use shorter exploration trajectories and smaller labeling batches, with 30,000 MD steps and 100 newly labeled configurations per iteration. Starting from the sixth iteration, the workflow switches to longer exploration and larger labeling batches, with 100,000 MD steps and 200 labeled configurations per iteration. The model-deviation statistics show that the ensemble of concurrently trained models becomes progressively more consistent during the first five iterations. After the sixth iteration, the model disagreement increases because the exploration and labeling scale is expanded; the effect of the increased labeling set appears from the seventh iteration onward, after which the models become increasingly consistent again, indicating that the configurational sampling has become sufficiently comprehensive. Beyond the two illustrative examples above, ai2-kit has also been adopted in recent AI 2

studies spanning electrochemistry, catalysis, and materials discovery. In electrochemistry, ElectroFace used ai2-kit to help organize and standardize an AI-accelerated ab initio molecular dynamics dataset for electrochemical interfaces, improving the accessibility and reuse of interfacial simulation data. 47 In dynamic catalysis, the CatFlow workflow built on ai2-kit to automate machine learning potential training and free-energy calculations for catalytic reactions, thereby reducing the manual effort required for end-to-end finite-temperature reaction profiling. 48 In semiconductor alloy discovery, ChecMatE combined ai2-kit with stochastic surface walking (SSW) methods 49;50 to automatically generate machine learning potentials and phase diagrams, showing that ai2-kit can also support global structural exploration beyond conventional molecular-dynamics-based sampling. 51 

9Figure 5: (a) Representative snapshot of the Au/CO 2 system. (b) Evolution of the model-deviation statistics during the TESLA workflow. (c,d) Validation accuracy of the trained MLP model, showing (c) energy and (d) force predictions against reference data. (e) Convergence of the free-energy difference at 200, 300, 400, and 500 K. (f) Temperature dependence of the free energy. 

## Free energy perturbation for reversible particle insertion 

Computing thermodynamic properties such as redox potentials, pKa values, and solvation free energies from molecular simulations requires free energy perturbation (FEP) methods that sample multiple thermodynamic states connected by a coupling parameter λ. Training machine learning potentials (MLPs) for FEP calculations presents a distinct challenge: the potential must accurately describe not only the physical endpoints but also the intermediate states along the alchemical transformation pathway. To address this, ai2-kit supports FEP calculations by extending the TESLA workflow to seamlessly handle the dual-state nature of free energy surfaces. As illustrated in the generalized particle (electron/proton/ion) insertion framework (Figure 6a), ai2-kit introduces free energy perturbation directly into the active learning loop. Unlike a standard TESLA loop driven by a single data stream, the FEP workflow constructs coupled potential energy surfaces to systematically collect datasets for both the initial and final states. Users can implement this by configuring separate input templates for the two states and utilizing ai2-kit’s path partitioning to isolate the data streams, requiring minimal modifications to the standard setup. The workflow handles different types of chemical transformations through distinct potential mapping strategies (Figure 6a). For electron transfer processes, such as redox free energy calculations, the same atomic structure must be computed in both oxidized and reduced electronic states. These states require different ab initio configurations due to differing charges and multiplicities. ai2-kit manages this by accepting separate labeling templates for each state and training two independent MLPs. During the exploration stage, LAMMPS hybrid potentials linearly mix the two state potentials at a series of η values. Conversely, for proton or ion transfer processes like pKa and solvation calculations, the protonated and deprotonated structures differ explicitly in atomic coordinates. Therefore, a single universal potential set suffices for both states. During MD exploration, DeePMD-kit 10 exclusion parameters are dynamically applied to selectively deactivate interactions involving the transferred particle (e.g., the transferring proton), effectively yielding the deprotonated-state potential. At the labeling step, ai2-kit’s format conversion tool automatically extracts and generates the corresponding configurations from the MD output structures. Under this framework, ai2-kit fully automates the complexity of dual data streams, multi-η sampling, state-specific labeling, and format conversions — operations that are traditionally highly manual and error-prone. To demonstrate the validity of this training methodology, we evaluated the workflow on both electron and proton transfer processes. For redox free energy, we investigated the OH/OH −

redox couple (Figure 6b). By employing the dual-potential approach, the workflow achieves high precision across the entire alchemical pathway. The force and energy errors remain strictly bounded at different coupling parameters ( η), confirming that the coupled potential energy surfaces accurately capture the electronic transition between the radical and the anion. For proton transfer reactions, we computed the deprotonation free energy of the hydronium ion (H 3O+) (Figure 6c). The workflow successfully sampled the transformation using a single MLP with interaction exclusions. While the standard η windows (0.00, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.00) provided the baseline sampling, ai2-kit’s combinatorial tools easily facilitated the addition of dense sampling at η = 0 .90 and 0.95 to properly integrate the sharp gradient changes near the endpoint. The resulting free energy profile demonstrates excellent quantitative agreement with ab initio benchmarks, yielding an error of less than 0.05 eV between the MLMD-derived deprotonation free energy and direct DFT validations. 

Figure 6: (a) Schematic of the generalized particle insertion framework for electron, proton, and ion transfer processes. (b) Validation of redox free energy calculations using the OH/OH − redox couple. Force errors for both initial and final states remain strictly bounded across different coupling parameters. (c) Validation of deprotonation free energy for the hydronium ion (H 3O+). Additional dense sampling near the endpoint ( η = 0 .90 , 0.95 ) ensures high accuracy, yielding an error of less than 0.05 eV compared to DFT validation. Wang et al. previously applied an earlier iteration of this workflow to compute redox potentials and pKa values for a series of organic molecules in aqueous organic redox flow batteries, 5;52 

using DeePMD-kit potentials with LAMMPS hybrid-potential MD and CP2K labeling. 

## Incorporating electric field in simulating electrochemical interfaces 

Simulating electrochemical interfaces, such as electrode–electrolyte systems in batteries, elec-trocatalysis, or corrosion, requires accurate treatment of long-range electrostatic interactions and dielectric response, which standard machine learning potentials struggle to capture. To address this, ai2-kit provides a variant of the TESLA workflow that trains an electrochemical 11 machine learning potential (ec-MLP). The ec-MLP framework combines a machine-learning-based Wannier center model, which predicts the polarization response of the electrolyte via atomic dipole moments, with a polarizable electrode treatment that resolves the induced charge distribution on the electrode under applied bias. Together, these components enable efficient and accurate description of long-range electrostatics and dielectric response at electrified interfaces, making ec-MLP well suited for electrochemical simulations of battery interphases, electrocatalytic surfaces, and corrosion processes. The ec-MLP variant of TESLA augments the base active-learning loop with an additional Wannier-center training branch. At the labeling stage, the input templates for a first-principles engine such as CP2K, VASP, or Mokit 53 must be explicitly configured to sample Wannier centers alongside energies and forces; ai2-kit then converts these outputs — including center coordinates, spreads, and charge assignments — into the format required by the DeepMD-kit Deep Wannier module 54 with a single command. Furthermore, the training configuration necessitates a sequential two-step setup: a Deep Wannier model is trained prior to the ec-MLP, and its predicted atomic dipoles are passed as input features to the ec-MLP training step. For the exploration stage, ai2-kit couples the trained models with LAMMPS running in constant-potential mode 55 : the ec-MLP provides short-range energies and forces, Deep Wannier predicts Wannier center positions on the fly, and a polarizable electrode method self-consistently determines electrode atomic charges that satisfy the applied bias. Despite these additional configuration steps, the complete ec-MLP workflow is launched with a single command in the same style as the standard TESLA workflow; the corresponding template files and launch script are provided in the ai2-kit repository.   

> ai2-kit tool dpdata read ./iter-00*/cp2k/job-*/ --fmt cp2k/dplr \ --cp2k_output="output" --wannier_file="wannier.xyz" \ --type_map="[Cu,H,O]" --sel_type="[2]" --model_charge_map="[-8]" \ - write ./new-dataset

As a demonstration of this capability, we applied the ec-MLP workflow to the Cu(111)/water interface under constant-potential MD simulations. Figure 8a illustrates the simulation cell subjected to an external bias of 0.4 V. The high precision of the ec-MLP ensures stable MD trajectories that reliably capture voltage-induced structural transitions at the electrochemical interface. Figure 8b displays the water density profiles ( ρ) near the positive electrode, at the potential of zero charge (PZC), and near the negative electrode. The shaded red and blue regions clearly demarcate the distinct formation of chemisorbed and physisorbed water layers, respectively. This interfacial restructuring is accompanied by pronounced dipolar reorientation, as depicted by the water orientation profiles ( ρH2O cos θ) in Figure 8c. The ec-MLP faithfully captures the specific orientation of water molecules within the chemisorbed and physisorbed regions in response to the local electrode polarization. Additionally, the orientation bias extending into the bulk region reflects the absence of ionic screening in pure water, where the unscreened electric field drives long-range dipole alignment. Full methodological details and an application of this workflow to the more complex Pt(111)/aqueous NaCl interface were reported by Zhu and Cheng; 56 their simulated differ-ential capacitance agreed quantitatively with experimental measurements. 12 Figure 7: Schematic of the ec-MLP active-learning workflow in ai2-kit. The loop partitions the learning process into two coupled branches: a Deep Wannier (DW) model is first trained to predict atomic dipoles for long-range interactions, and its outputs are embedded as input features to train the ec-MLP model for short-range interactions. Together, they drive constant-potential MD exploration to sample and screen new candidate structures. 13 Figure 8: Demonstration of the ec-MLP workflow applied to the Cu(111)/water interface under constant-potential MD simulations. (a) Schematic representation of the simulation cell subjected to an external bias of 0.4 V. (b) Water density profiles ( ρ) near the positive electrode, at the potential of zero charge (PZC), and near the negative electrode. The red and blue shaded areas highlight the chemisorbed and physisorbed water layers, respectively. (c) Corresponding dipole density profiles ( ρH2O cos θ). 

## Validating complex structures by computing spectroscopies 

Spectroscopy provides a natural bridge between atomistic simulations and experiments: com-puted IR, Raman, and sum-frequency generation (SFG) spectra can be directly compared with laboratory measurements, offering both a stringent test of the underlying model and a way to interpret experimental features in molecular terms. Obtaining converged spectra, however, requires long trajectories and large simulation cells to adequately sample the relevant conformational and dielectric fluctuations. In this regime, direct ab initio molecular dynamics becomes prohibitively expensive and is usually limited to short trajectories that yield noisy, poorly converged spectra. Machine learning molecular dynamics (MLMD) closes this gap — with a machine-learned potential (MLP) trained to ab initio accuracy, nanosecond-long trajectories of thousands of atoms become routine, enabling reliable spectroscopic predictions that match the resolution of experimental data. ai2-kit provides a dedicated spectroscopy workflow for calculating IR, Raman, and SFG spectra, and the same machinery can be applied to other properties derived from dipole moments and polarizabilities. The workflow is organized in two stages. A TESLA-trained MLP first drives large-scale MLMD sampling of the conformational ensemble at ab initio accuracy. Then, Deep Wannier (DW) models 54;57 , trained on Wannier center outputs from the sampled configurations — computed both at zero field and with small electric fields applied along x, y, and z — predict atomic dipoles and polarizabilities along the full MLMD trajectory. Ensemble averages, time-correlation functions, and their Fourier transforms yield the final spectra. ai2-kit handles sampling, format conversion for spectroscopic codes, batch Wannier/polarizability calculations, and ensemble-averaged property computation as a set of composable commands. To illustrate this capability, we demonstrate the calculation of the IR, Raman and SFG spectra at the air–water interface (Figure 9). The corresponding shell-script example is available 14 in the ai2-kit repository. This script builds on ai2-kit’s CLI tools and consists of the following main steps. First, the TESLA loop is used to train an MLP for the air–water system. Next, ai2-kit’s omb command automates Wannier-center calculations on the sampled configurations: one at zero field and three with small electric fields applied along the x, y, and z directions — the finite-field calculations needed to extract polarizabilities via finite differences. Finally, the script calls dp to train two DW models, one for dipole moments and one for polarizabilities. Once the trained MLP and DW models are available, users can perform the production MLMD and compute their target spectra from the resulting trajectories and per-frame dipole and polarizability outputs. Because this stage is post-processing rather than part of ai2-kit’s core workflow management, we do not detail it here; reference scripts for IR, Raman, and SFG analysis are nonetheless provided in the ai2-kit repository. 

Figure 9: Schematic of the ai2-kit spectroscopy workflow. A TESLA-trained MLP drives large-scale MLMD sampling; a Deep Wannier (DW) model trained on Wannier-center outputs (at zero field and with small applied fields along x, y, z) predicts atomic dipoles and polarizabilities along the full trajectory; ensemble-averaged time-correlation functions and their Fourier transforms yield the final IR/Raman/SFG spectra. Results for the air–water interface are shown in Figure 10. A structural snapshot of the simulated slab, with a vacuum region representing the air phase, is depicted in Figure 10a. To validate the accuracy of the trained DP and DW models, 100 configurations were randomly selected from a 2 ns trajectory, and the energies, forces, dipole moments, and polarizabilities were recalculated using reference DFT calculations for comparison. The results are shown in Figure 10b–e, respectively. The RMSEs of the predicted energy per atom and atomic forces are below 1 meV/atom and 0.1 eV/Å, respectively, satisfying the general accuracy requirements for machine-learning potentials. The predicted dipole moments are in good agreement with the DFT reference values, whereas the polarizability tensor components show a larger scatter. Nevertheless, as demonstrated below, these deviations do not significantly affect the calculated vibrational spectra. We then calculated the IR spectrum and the isotropic and anisotropic Raman spectra for the bulk-like region of the air–water interface, together with the imaginary parts of the xxz and yyz polarization components of the SFG spectrum for the interfacial region. For clarity, only the O–H stretching region is compared with the corresponding experimental spectra, as shown in Figure 10f–h. The calculated Raman and SFG spectra reproduce both the peak shapes and vibrational frequencies observed experimentally, demonstrating that the present workflow can efficiently obtain vibrational spectra with DFT-level accuracy. The main discrepancy appears in the IR spectrum. This difference arises because a uniform nuclear quantum correction factor 15 of 0.96 12 was applied to the calculated vibrational frequencies to partially account for the missing nuclear quantum effects in the classical simulations of O–H stretching vibrations. This correction brings the Raman and SFG peak positions into better agreement with experiment, while causing a slight deviation in the IR peak frequency. Since the purpose of this validation is to demonstrate the feasibility and accuracy of the computational workflow rather than to achieve exact quantitative agreement with all experimental spectra, this minor discrepancy does not affect the overall conclusion. 

Figure 10: Validation of the trained DP and DW models for the air–water interface. (a) Snapshot of the simulated air–water interface with a vacuum region representing the air phase. (b) Parity plot of the predicted energy per atom against the DFT reference values. The average value of the energy of was shifted to zero for better visualization. (c) Parity plot of the predicted atomic forces against the DFT reference values. (d) Parity plot comparing the DW-predicted dipole moments with the DFT reference values. (e) Parity plot comparing the DW-predicted polarizability tensor components with the DFT reference values. (f) Calculated and experimental 58 IR spectra for the bulk-like region. (g) Calculated and experimental 59 isotropic and anisotropic Raman spectra for the bulk-like region. (h) Calculated and experimental 60 imaginary SFG spectra for the interfacial region, including the xxz and yyz polarization components. Beyond the air–water interface, the same workflow is readily applicable to other complex interfacial and bulk systems. As a concrete example, Du et al. 15 employed ai2-kit to compute the IR, Raman, and SFG spectra of the aluminum oxide–water interface, achieving close agreement with experimental observations and demonstrating the workflow’s transferability across chemically distinct environments. 

## Example-driven workflow distribution 

As outlined in the section “Program structure”, ai2-kit exposes a wide family of command-line tools that researchers can compose into custom workflows for their own scientific problems. For users who prefer to get started without first assembling these commands, ai2-kit also ships an executable example for many applications, including TESLA-based MLP training, FEP, ec-MLP, and spectroscopy, under example/use-case/ in the ai2-kit GitHub repository. Each example is a self-contained directory comprising configuration templates, workflow scripts, and a launchable entry point (typically run.sh ), curated so that the entire pipeline runs end-to-end with minimal setup. These examples serve as ready-to-modify templates that users can adapt to their own systems through localized edits to the configuration files and a handful of parameters. 16 Furthermore, the concise and independent nature of these example-driven workflows makes them exceptionally well-suited for integration with AI code agents. To assist users in adapting workflows, ai2-kit provides AI agent skills in the ./skills/ directory. For example, the 

build-tesla skill (a plugin mechanism designed to extend an AI agent’s capabilities) allows users to generate new workflows from existing TESLA examples by simply substituting the underlying computational engines, such as the machine learning potential, molecular dynamics, or ab initio software. For instance, we performed an experiment in which an AI code agent was used to develop a new TESLA workflow. The workflow was initialized by copying the complete tesla-h2o 

example into a new working directory named skill-demo , which served as the starting point for the migration. The experiment was conducted in Visual Studio Code using the GitHub Copilot code agent with the Claude Code Sonnet 4.6 model. After installing the build-tesla skill, the following prompt was issued:       

> /build-tesla Build a TESLA workflow based on the current project, using MACE for the MLIP, OpenMM with the MACE potential for molecular dynamics exploration, and VASP for data labeling.

In response to build-tesla , the agent generated iter-classic-mace-openmm-vasp.sh 

as the top-level workflow script. It also populated the corresponding configuration templates under ./00-config for MACE, OpenMM, and VASP, wired the OpenMM exploration stage to the MACE potential, and added the model-deviation utility needed to grade candidate structures after each exploration run. This means that users can start from the generated workflow, then continue refining cluster-specific details by sending follow-up prompts to the agent or by editing the configuration files manually, including software loading commands, job-submission parameters, MACE/OpenMM/VASP settings, and active-learning thresholds. Once those project-specific details are in place, the complete active-learning loop can be launched directly with ./run.sh .In total, the agent modified or created 14 files. The core workflow file, 01-workflow/ iter-classic-mace-openmm-vasp.sh , contains only 178 lines, illustrating the compactness of workflow development based on ai2-kit. These files are also available in the example/ folder of the ai2-kit GitHub repository. The figure summarizes the resulting workflow behavior. Figure 11a shows that the generated workflow completes five active-learning iterations with most structures remaining in the accurate region and only a small fraction routed to candidate or failed bins for labeling or inspection. Figure 11b shows that the MLMD trajectory reproduces the reference O–O radial distribution function, while Figure 11c,d show tight energy and force agreement with the reference labels. In the bulk-water test reported with this demo, the workflow collected 94 labeled structures before reaching DeePMD-kit-comparable training accuracy, showing that ai2-kit can use an AI agent to turn an example TESLA template into a working MACE/OpenMM/VASP active-learning setup with only localized edits. 17 Figure 11: End-to-end MACE/OpenMM/VASP skill demonstration generated with build-tesla .(a) Model-deviation statistics across five active-learning iterations. (b) O–O radial distribution function (RDF) from MLMD compared with the reference AIMD result. (c,d) Validation accuracy of the trained MACE model, showing (c) energy and (d) force predictions against reference data. 

# Conclusions 

Complex chemical systems increasingly require simulations that combine electronic-structure accuracy with extensive finite-temperature sampling. AI 2 methods provide a practical route toward this goal, but their routine use in chemical research is often limited by the difficulty of constructing reliable workflows across multiple software packages, data formats, simulation engines, and high-performance-computing environments. In this work, we presented ai2-kit as a toolkit designed to lower this practical barrier and make AI 2 workflow development more accessible to chemists. The examples demonstrated here show that ai2-kit is not limited to a single type of machine learning potential or a single simulation protocol. Through its high-semantic-density interfaces, composable command-line tools, and ready-to-modify workflow templates, ai2-kit supports active-learning-based MLP construction, free-energy perturbation for redox and acid–base processes, electrochemical machine learning potentials for electrified interfaces, and MLMD-based spectroscopic prediction. These applications involve different chemical questions and different combinations of training codes, molecular dynamics engines, first-principles software, and analysis tools, yet they can be expressed within a common workflow framework. For users, the main benefit is that the effort of applying AI 2 methods can be shifted from rebuilding technical infrastructure to formulating and testing chemical hypotheses. Routine operations such as dataset conversion, batch task generation, model-deviation screening, job submission, checkpoint recovery, and workflow adaptation are handled as reusable components rather than repeatedly rewritten for each project. As a result, researchers can more rapidly construct MLPs, extend them to specialized applications, and validate the resulting simulations against thermodynamic, electrochemical, or spectroscopic observables. Looking forward, we envision ai2-kit as an example-driven and extensible ecosystem for AI 2

18 chemistry. New workflow templates can be developed from existing examples by changing the target system, computational engine, sampling strategy, or property model, while preserving the same underlying workflow logic. By making these workflows easier to build, modify, reproduce, and share, ai2-kit can help accelerate the adoption of AI-accelerated ab initio simulation in the study of complex chemical systems. 

# Author contributions 

Conceptualization : J.C. Methodology : S.B., X.Y., F.W., F.T., W.X., J.C. Software : All authors. Writing : All authors. Supervision : J.C. 

# Conflicts of interest 

There are no conflicts to declare. 

# Data availability 

ai2-kit is open source and available on GitHub at https://github.com/chenggroup/ai2-kit ,together with its documentation and example workflows. All cases demonstrated in this paper are provided as ready-to-run use cases in the repository and can be reproduced from there. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 22225302, 92470201, 92461312, 22021001, 21991151, 21991150, 92161113, and 22411560277 to J.C.; Grant Nos. 22393901 and 22503037 to F.W.; Grant No. 22503072 to S.B.), the New Generation Artificial Intelligence – National Science and Technology Major Project (Grant No. 2025ZD0122703), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant Nos. 20720250005, 20720220009, and 20720230090 to J.C.), and the Laboratory of AI for Electrochemistry (AI4EC) and IKKEM (Grant Nos. RD2023100101 and RD2022070501 to J.C. and F.W.). 

# Notes and references References 

[1] D. G. Truhlar, Molecular Modeling of Complex Chemical Systems, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2008, 130 , 16824–16827, DOI: 10.1021/ja808927h. [2] M. Gastegger, K. T. Schütt and K.-R. Müller, Machine learning of solvent effects on molecular spectra and reactions, Chemical Science , 2021, 12 , 11473–11483, DOI: 10.1039/D1SC02742E. [3] B. R. Goldsmith, J. Esterhuizen, J.-X. Liu, C. J. Bartel and C. Sutton, Machine learning for heterogeneous catalyst design and discovery, AIChE Journal , 2018, 64 , 2311–2323, DOI: 10.1002/aic.16198. [4] S. Xue, P. Chaudhary, M. R. Nouri, E. Gubanova, B. Garlyyev, V. Alexandrov and A. S. Bandarenka, Impact of Pt(hkl) Electrode Surface Structure on the Electrical Double Layer Capacitance, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2024, 146 , 3883–3889, DOI: 10.1021/jacs.3c11403. 19 [5] F. Wang, Z. Ma and J. Cheng, Accelerating Computation of Acidity Constants and Redox Potentials for Aqueous Organic Redox Flow Batteries by Machine Learning Potential-Based Molecular Dynamics, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2024, 146 , 14566–14575, DOI: 10.1021/jacs.4c01221. [6] B. Cheng, M. Bethkenhagen, C. J. Pickard and S. Hamel, Phase behaviours of superionic water at planetary conditions, Nature Physics , 2021, 17 , 1228–1232, DOI: 10.1038/s41567-021-01334-9. [7] F. Wang and J. Cheng, Unraveling the origin of reductive stability of super-concentrated electrolytes from first principles and unsupervised machine learning, Chemical Science , 2022, 

13 , 11570–11576, DOI: 10.1039/D2SC04025E. [8] F. Wang, Y. Sun and J. Cheng, Switching of Redox Levels Leads to High Reductive Stability in Water-in-Salt Electrolytes, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2023, 

145 , 4056–4064, DOI: 10.1021/jacs.2c11793. [9] M. Jia, Y.-B. Zhuang, F. Wang, C. Zhang and J. Cheng, Water-Mediated Proton Hopping Mechanisms at the SnO 2(110)/H 2O Interface from Ab Initio Deep Potential Molecular Dynamics, Precision Chemistry , 2024, 2, 644–654, DOI: 10.1021/prechem.4c00056. [10] A. A. Kornyshev, Double-Layer in Ionic Liquids: Paradigm Change?, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 2007, 111 , 5545–5557, DOI: 10.1021/jp067857o. [11] M. Z. Bazant, B. D. Storey and A. A. Kornyshev, Double Layer in Ionic Liquids: Over-screening versus Crowding, Physical Review Letters , 2011, 106 , 046102, DOI: 10.1103/Phys-RevLett.106.046102. [12] F. Tang, T. Ohto, S. Sun, J. R. Rouxel, S. Imoto, E. H. G. Backus, S. Mukamel, M. Bonn and Y. Nagata, Molecular Structure and Modeling of Water–Air and Ice–Air Interfaces Monitored by Sum-Frequency Generation, Chemical Reviews , 2020, 120 , 3633–3667, DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00512. [13] N. K. Kaliannan, A. Henao Aristizabal, H. Wiebeler, F. Zysk, T. Ohto, Y. Nagata and T. D. Kühne, Impact of intermolecular vibrational coupling effects on the sum-frequency generation spectra of the water/air interface, Molecular Physics , 2020, 118 , 1620358, DOI: 10.1080/00268976.2019.1620358. [14] T. Seki, C.-C. Yu, K.-Y. Chiang, J. Tan, S. Sun, S. Ye, M. Bonn and Y. Nagata, Dis-entangling Sum-Frequency Generation Spectra of the Water Bending Mode at Charged Aqueous Interfaces, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 2021, 125 , 7060–7067, DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c03258. [15] X. Du, W. Shao, C. Bao, L. Zhang, J. Cheng and F. Tang, Revealing the molecular structures of α-Al 2O3(0001)–water interface by machine learning based computational vibrational spectroscopy, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2024, 161 , 124702, DOI: 10.1063/5.0230101. [16] D. Marx and J. Hutter, Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics: Basic Theory and Advanced Methods ,Cambridge University Press, 2009, DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511609633. [17] T. D. Kühne, Second generation Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics, WIREs Computational Molecular Science , 2014, 4, 391–406, DOI: 10.1002/wcms.1176. [18] W. Jia, H. Wang, M. Chen, D. Lu, L. Lin, R. Car, W. E and L. Zhang, Pushing the Limit of Molecular Dynamics with Ab Initio Accuracy to 100 Million Atoms with Machine Learning, SC20: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2020, pp. 1–14, DOI: 10.1109/SC41405.2020.00009. 20 [19] J. Behler, Four Generations of High-Dimensional Neural Network Potentials, Chemical Reviews , 2021, 121 , 10037–10072, DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00868. [20] O. T. Unke, S. Chmiela, H. E. Sauceda, M. Gastegger, I. Poltavsky, K. T. Schütt, A. Tkatchenko and K.-R. Müller, Machine Learning Force Fields, Chemical Reviews , 2021, 

121 , 10142–10186, DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c01111. [21] V. L. Deringer, M. A. Caro and G. Csányi, Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials as Emerging Tools for Materials Science, Advanced Materials , 2019, 31 , 1902765, DOI: 10.1002/adma.201902765. [22] Q.-Y. Fan, Y.-P. Liu, H.-X. Zhu, F.-Q. Gong, Y. Wang, W. E, X. Bao, Z.-Q. Tian and J. Cheng, Entropy in catalyst dynamics under confinement, Chemical Science , 2024, 15 ,18303–18309, DOI: 10.1039/D4SC05399K. [23] F.-Q. Gong, Y.-P. Liu, Y. Wang, W. E, Z.-Q. Tian and J. Cheng, Machine Learning Molecular Dynamics Shows Anomalous Entropic Effect on Catalysis through Surface Pre-melting of Nanoclusters, Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 2024, 63 , e202405379, DOI: 10.1002/anie.202405379. [24] K.-X. Zhang, L. Chen and Z.-P. Liu, Do Rh-Hydride Phases Contribute to the Catalytic Activity of Rh Catalysts under Reductive Conditions?, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2024, 146 , 35416–35426, DOI: 10.1021/jacs.4c14404. [25] L. Zhou, X.-P. Fu, R. Wang, C.-X. Wang, F. Luo, H. Yan, Y. He, C.-J. Jia, J. Li and J.-C. Liu, Dynamic phase transitions dictate the size effect and activity of supported gold catalysts, Science Advances , 2024, 10 , eadr4145, DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adr4145. [26] Y. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Chen, J. Zeng, L. Zhang, H. Wang and W. E, DP-GEN: A concurrent learning platform for the generation of reliable deep learning based potential energy models, 

Computer Physics Communications , 2020, 253 , 107206, DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2020.107206. [27] J. Vandermause, S. B. Torrisi, S. Batzner, Y. Xie, L. Sun, A. M. Kolpak and B. Kozinsky, On-the-fly active learning of interpretable Bayesian force fields for atomistic rare events, 

npj Computational Materials , 2020, 6, 20, DOI: 10.1038/s41524-020-0283-z. [28] Y. Babuji, A. Woodard, Z. Li, D. S. Katz, B. Clifford, R. Kumar, L. Lacinski, R. Chard, J. M. Wozniak, I. Foster, M. Wilde and K. Chard, Parsl: Pervasive Parallel Programming in Python, Proceedings of the 28th International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2019, pp. 25–36, DOI: 10.1145/3307681.3325400. [29] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, W. Chen, B. Medasani, X. Qu, M. Kocher, M. Brafman, G. Petretto, G.-M. Rignanese, G. Hautier, D. Gunter and K. A. Persson, FireWorks: a dynamic workflow system designed for high-throughput applications, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience , 2015, 27 , 5037–5059, DOI: 10.1002/cpe.3505. [30] X. Liu, Y. Han, Z. Li, J. Fan, C. Zhang, J. Zeng, Y. Shan, Y. Yuan, W.-H. Xu, Y.-P. Liu, Y. Zhang, T. Wen, D. M. York, Z. Zhong, H. Zheng, J. Cheng, L. Zhang and H. Wang, Dflow, a Python framework for constructing cloud-native AI-for-Science workflows , arXiv:2404.18392, 2024, https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.18392 , DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2404.18392. [31] F. Mölder, K. P. Jablonski, B. Letcher, M. B. Hall, C. H. Tomkins-Tinch, V. Sochat, J. Forster, S. Lee, S. O. Twardziok, A. Kanitz, A. Wilm, M. Holtgrewe, S. Rahmann, S. Nahnsen and J. Köster, Sustainable data analysis with Snakemake, F1000Research , 2021, 

10 , 33, DOI: 10.12688/f1000research.29032.2. 21 [32] T. D. Kühne, M. Iannuzzi, M. Del Ben, V. V. Rybkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khaliullin, O. Schütt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wilhelm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borštnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Lazzaro, H. Pabst, T. Müller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Glöß, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. VandeVondele, M. Krack and J. Hutter, CP2K: An electronic structure and molecular dynamics software package—Quickstep: Efficient and accurate electronic structure calculations, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2020, 152 , 194103, DOI: 10.1063/5.0007045. [33] G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy cal-culations using a plane-wave basis set, Physical Review B , 1996, 54 , 11169–11186, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169. [34] W. Zhou, D. Zheng, Q. Liu, D. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Lin, Y. Huang, X. Peng, J. J. Bao, C. Cai, Z. Jin, J. Wu, H. Zhang, G. Jin, Y. Ji, Z. Shen, X. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Cao, M. Sun, J. Liu, T. Chen, R. Liu, Y. Li, H. Han, X. Liang, T. Bao, Z. Deng, T. Liu, N. Chen, H. Ren, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, Y. Fu, M. Liu, Z. Li, T. Wen, Z. Tang, Y. Xu, W. Duan, X. Wang, Q. Gu, F.-Z. Dai, Q. Zheng, Y. Zhong, H. Xiang, X. Gong, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Q. Ou, H. Jiang, S. Liu, B. Xu, S. Xu, X. Ren, L. He, L. Zhang and M. Chen, ABACUS: An electronic structure analysis package for the AI era, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2025, 163 ,192501, DOI: 10.1063/5.0297563. [35] S. Plimpton, Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics, Journal of Computational Physics , 1995, 117 , 1–19, DOI: 10.1006/jcph.1995.1039. [36] M. Bonomi, D. Branduardi, G. Bussi, C. Camilloni, D. Provasi, P. Raiteri, D. Donadio, F. Marinelli, F. Pietrucci, R. A. Broglia and M. Parrinello, PLUMED: A portable plugin for free-energy calculations with molecular dynamics, Computer Physics Communications ,2009, 180 , 1961–1972, DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2009.05.011. [37] S. S. Schoenholz and E. D. Cubuk, JAX M.D. A Framework for Differentiable Physics, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020. [38] M. Ceriotti, J. More and D. E. Manolopoulos, i-PI: A Python interface for ab initio path integral molecular dynamics simulations, Computer Physics Communications , 2014, 185 ,1019–1026, DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2013.10.027. [39] H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Han and W. E, DeePMD-kit: A deep learning package for many-body potential energy representation and molecular dynamics, Computer Physics Communications ,2018, 228 , 178–184, DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2018.03.016. [40] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. N. C. Simm, C. Ortner and G. Csanyi, MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. [41] I. Batatia, S. Batzner, D. P. Kovács, A. Musaelian, G. N. C. Simm, R. Drautz, C. Ortner, B. Kozinsky and G. Csányi, The Design Space of E(3)-Equivariant Atom-Centered Interatomic Potentials , 2022, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.06643 ,DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2205.06643. [42] R. Gao, DeepMD-JAX: A JAX implementation of Deep Potential , 2023, https://github. com/SparkyTruck/deepmd-jax .22 [43] F. Bigi, S. Chong, M. Ceriotti and F. Grasselli, A prediction rigidity formalism for low-cost uncertainties in trained neural networks, Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 2024, 

5, 045018, DOI: 10.1088/2632-2153/ad805f. [44] S. Chong, F. Bigi, F. Grasselli, P. Loche, M. Kellner and M. Ceriotti, Prediction rigidities for data-driven chemistry, Faraday Discussions , 2025, 256 , 322–344, DOI: 10.1039/D4FD00101J. [45] J.-J. Sun and J. Cheng, Solid-to-liquid phase transitions of sub-nanometer clusters enhance chemical transformation, Nature Communications , 2019, 10 , 5400, DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-13509-3. [46] Q.-Y. Fan, F.-Q. Gong, Y.-P. Liu, H.-X. Zhu and J. Cheng, Modeling Dynamic Catalysis at ab Initio Accuracy: The Need for Free-Energy Calculation, ACS Catalysis , 2024, 14 ,16086–16097, DOI: 10.1021/acscatal.4c05372. [47] Y.-B. Zhuang, C. Liu, J.-X. Zhu, J.-Y. Hu, J.-B. Le, J.-Q. Li, X.-J. Wen, X.-T. Fan, M. Jia, X.-Y. Li, A. Chen, L. Li, Z.-L. Lin, W.-H. Xu and J. Cheng, An artificial intelligence accelerated ab initio molecular dynamics dataset for electrochemical interfaces, Scientific Data , 2025, 12 , 997, DOI: 10.1038/s41597-025-05338-5. [48] Y.-P. Liu, Q.-Y. Fan, F.-Q. Gong and J. Cheng, CatFlow: An Automated Workflow for Training Machine Learning Potentials to Compute Free Energies in Dynamic Catalysis, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C , 2025, 129 , 1089–1102, DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.4c05568. [49] C. Shang and Z.-P. Liu, Stochastic Surface Walking Method for Structure Prediction and Pathway Searching, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation , 2013, 9, 1838–1845, DOI: 10.1021/ct301010b. [50] C. Shang, X.-J. Zhang and Z.-P. Liu, Stochastic surface walking method for crystal structure and phase transition pathway prediction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. , 2014, 16 , 17845–17856, DOI: 10.1039/C4CP01485E. [51] Y.-X. Guo, Y.-B. Zhuang, J. Shi and J. Cheng, ChecMatE: A workflow package to automat-ically generate machine learning potentials and phase diagrams for semiconductor alloys, 

The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2023, 159 , 094801, DOI: 10.1063/5.0166858. [52] F. Wang and J. Cheng, Automated workflow for computation of redox potentials, acidity constants, and solvation free energies accelerated by machine learning, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2022, 157 , 024103, DOI: 10.1063/5.0098330. [53] J. Zou, Molecular Orbital Kit (MOKIT) , 2026, https://gitlab.com/jxzou/mokit .[54] L. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Wu, H. Wang, W. E and R. Car, Deep neural network for the dielectric response of insulators, Physical Review B , 2020, 102 , 041121, DOI: 10.1103/Phys-RevB.102.041121. [55] L. J. V. Ahrens-Iwers, M. Janssen, S. R. Tee and R. H. Meißner, ELECTRODE: An electrochemistry package for atomistic simulations, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2022, 

157 , 084801, DOI: 10.1063/5.0099239. [56] J.-X. Zhu and J. Cheng, Machine Learning Potential for Electrochemical Interfaces with Hybrid Representation of Dielectric Response, Physical Review Letters , 2025, 135 , 018003, DOI: 10.1103/48ct-3jxm. 23 [57] G. M. Sommers, M. F. Calegari Andrade, L. Zhang, H. Wang and R. Car, Raman spectrum and polarizability of liquid water from deep neural networks, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 2020, 22 , 10592–10602, DOI: 10.1039/D0CP01893G. [58] P. Larouche, J.-J. Max and C. Chapados, Isotope Effects in Liquid Water by Infrared Spectroscopy. II. Factor Analysis of the Temperature Effect on H2O and D2O, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2008, 129 , 064503, DOI: 10.1063/1.2960583. [59] J. R. Scherer, M. K. Go and S. Kint, Raman Spectra and Structure of Water from -10 to 90.deg., The Journal of Physical Chemistry , 1974, 78 , 1304–1313, DOI: 10.1021/j100606a013. [60] Y. Wang, F. Tang, X. Yu, T. Ohto, Y. Nagata and M. Bonn, Heterodyne-Detected Sum-Frequency Generation Vibrational Spectroscopy Reveals Aqueous Molecular Structure at the Suspended Graphene/Water Interface, Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 2024, 

63 , e202319503, DOI: 10.1002/anie.202319503. 24