Title: 2607.01362v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.01362v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:06:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 67

Markdown Content:
1

# Enerzyme: A Framework for Efficient Training of 

# Reactive Neural Network Potential s for Enzyme 

# Catalysis with Application to Methyltransferases 

Weiliang Luo 1,2 and Heather J. Kulik 1, 2, *

> 1

Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 

02139 , USA 

> 2

Department of Chemistry , Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 , USA 

*corresponding author email: hjkulik@mit.edu 

ABSTRACT : Quantum mechanical (QM) cluster models provide an effective framework for 

mechanistic studies of enzymatic reactions but remain computationally demanding . Neural 

network potentials (NNPs) offer a promising route to reduce their cost , but enzyme s introduce 

new challenges not faced by NNPs for small molecules , including large system sizes, implicit -

solvent environments, substantial polarization , and charge transfer. Here, we demonstrate an 

integrated software framework for efficient training of NNPs for mechanistic study of enzymes 

with demonstrations on QM cluster models of S-adenosyl -L-methionine -dependent 

methyltransferase s (MTase s). Our Enerzyme code introduces modular electrostatics -aware NNP 

architectures and combine s automated QM -cluster construction with reactive dataset generation .

The Enerzyme tte subpackage also automates reaction pathway exploration at both NNP and DFT 

levels of theory . We show that iterative flexible scans and nudged elastic band calculations 

impose stricter requirements on NNP s than conventional ly employed dataset metrics .

Nevertheless, we develop an approach to train NNPs on fewer than 1,000 system -specific 

datapoints to reproduce reaction energetics and transition state structures on MTase cluster s

containing up to 5 45 atoms to approaching chemical accuracy of the reference . We show that 

direct supervision of atomic charges and alignment of dielectric screening with QM -cluster 

calculations substantial ly improve simulation stability and accuracy and that multitask -learned 

atomic charges predict correct charge transfer and polarization trends and provide chemically 

meaningful descriptors of reactivity. Furthermore, we demonstrate transferability across 

chemically diverse catechol O-methyltransferase substrate s, indicating NNPs learn generaliz able 

reactivity patterns as training data is expanded across multiple enzymes. Together, these results 

establish a foundation for accelerating enzyme mechanistic studies and provide insights for 

future NNP development for biomolecular reactivity .2

1. Introduction .

Enzymes catalyze biochemical transformations efficiently and selectively 1,2 through 

interactions between the reacting species and the surrounding protein environment 3-5. As a result, 

simulations that aim at understanding enzym atic catalysis must capture both the reacting species 

and the influence of the protein environment 6,7 . Due to computational constraints in large 

biomolecules, practical approaches typically include a multi -scale quantum mechanical (QM) 

description of the core active site combined with treating the remaining system at a lower level 

of theory such as a molecular mechanics (MM) force field . QM -cluster models represent a

widely used and complementary alternative to QM/MM embedding that omits the atomistic 

details of the MM environment and avoids the need for extensive sampling 8-10 . Besides providing 

valuable mechanistic understanding in case studies 11 -13 thanks to increasingly large QM cluster 

models comprised of hundreds of atoms , r ecent advances in QM cluster workflow automation 

have further facilitated systematic comparison across diffe rent mutants 14 and enzyme 

families 15,16 .

Importantly, previous studies have shown that converged descriptions of enzymatic 

reactivity often require sufficiently large QM regions in embedding schemes 17,18 . S ince the use of 

minimal theozymes consisting of reactants and catalytic groups 19 , modern QM cluster models 

have expanded to 200 –600 atoms to include other cofactors and surrounding residues for their 

long -range interactions and second -shell effects 20,21 . Nevertheless , even with GPU -acceleration 

of quantum chemistry 22,23 at the protein scale 24 -26 , extensive exploration s of complex potential -

energy surfaces (PESs) in large QM -cluster model s remain computationally demanding , limit ing 

the throughput of simulations for large -scale, comprehensive mechanistic studies . Neural 

network potentials (NNPs) 27 -29 have emerged as a surrogate modeling tool of chemical 3

reactions 30 -32 with near -quantum -chemical accuracy at dramatically reduced computational 

cost 33 -35 . In recent years, rapid advances in NNP foundation models 36 have extended their 

application in catalysis research from small molecule s37 -39 to enzyme s40 -42 . These developments 

suggest a compelling opportunity to accelerate mechanistic studies of enzyme catalysis 41,43 .

Progress in this direction will also inform the development of ML/MM approaches 42,44,45 or 

NNP -driven simulation of the full system for small -to -medium sized reactive biomolecules 46 -48 .

However, e nzyme QM clusters present new challenges to most NNP formulation s for 

molecular systems 49 -51 . Enzyme clusters are significantly larger than small molecule s in typical 

reaction datasets 52 -54 , and thus it is harder to learn their conformational and configurational space 

from training data 55 . QM cluster calculations are often embedded in implicit solvent s5,56 to 

represent the dielectric of the surrounding protein environment, blocking the direct transfer of the 

vacuum PES learned by foundation models 57,58 . In addition, many enzymatic reactions involv e

substantial polarization and charge transfer 18,59,60 , and thus , electrostatics must be well -described 

throughout the reaction pathway 61 -63 . Beyond the PES , electronic descriptors such as atomic 

charges are also frequently used to interpret interaction patterns and reactivity trends 64 -66 , which 

are present in only a few NNP architectures 67 -69 . NNP -driven s tructure –activity explorations , also 

require robust evaluation of flexible scans and nudged elastic band (NEB) workflows 70 -72 , which 

have not been extensively tested in enzymes . Mechanistic studies for enzyme cluster models 

introduce new demands on both the electrostatic -aware development 73 -75 and workflow -level 

evaluation of NNPs 76,77 that link prediction and simulation with reactivity trends and mechanism .

As a model system to demonstrate potential challenges in NNP development for 

enzymatic reactions, we focus on the S-adenosyl -L-methionine (SAM) -dependent 

methyltransferases (MT ase s) enzyme family that catalyze the S N2 transfer of a methyl group to a 4

wide array of nucleophiles. MTases constitute one of the most widespread enzyme superfamilies 

in nature 78,79 and participate in gene regulation 80 , protein repair 81 , drug metabolism 82 , and natural 

product biosynthesis 83 . Our p revious QM studies have shown that electrostatic interactions and 

charge transfer play a central role in their catalytic behavior 17,18,64 , making them particularly 

informative test systems for electrostatics -aware NNPs . Furthermore, the broadly conserved 

reaction pattern of MTases 84 enables systematic comparisons across chemically diverse enzyme 

systems. 

To both identify and address gaps in NNP development for enzyme catalysis, we present 

an integrated framework for NNP -driven mechanistic simulations demonstrated on QM cluster 

models of MTase enzymes . We combine automated QM -cluster construction and reactive dataset 

generation with electrostatics -aware NNP architecture and workflow -level structure –reactivity 

exploration . We investigate whether NNPs can reproduce key energetic, structural, and 

electronic features of QM -level mechanistic studies , further examine whether NNP -derived 

electronic descriptors capture reactivity trends, and assess the emergence of transferable 

biochemical modeling as training data expand to more enzyme systems. Together, these results 

establish a foundation for accelerating mechanistic studies of enzymatic reactions while 

preserving key chemical insights from quantum chemistry. 

2. Computational Details .

QM cluster model preparation. 

The QM cluster models of enzymes PfPMT 85 and HcgC 86,87 were obtained from our 

previous QM/MM studies 64 on methyltransferases (Supporting Information Table S1 and S 2).

QM cluster models of COMT s from the Protein Data Bank (PDB IDs: 1V ID88 , 2CL5 89 , 2ZVJ 90 ,5

3S68 91 , 4XU D92 , 4XUE 92 , 5LSA 93 , 6LFE 94 , 7XJB 95 ) surrounding th eir substrate, SAM cofactor, 

and Mg 2+ ion were built with the QuantumPDB package 16 (Supporting Information Table S3 and 

S4).

Reactive sampling of cluster models .

We conducted steered MD in the atomic simulation environment (ASE) 96 with its native 

xTB 97 and PLUMED 98,99 wrapper. S imilar to ref. 37 , a moving bias potential was applied to the 

collective variable (CV) dCX –dSC , steering the reactant to the product region. One -sided harmonic 

restraint potentials were added to all pair -wise distances between protein backbone atoms, water 

oxygens, and ion s (See Supporting Information Table S5 for parameter details). The underlying 

level of theory was GFN1 -xTB 100 with analytical linearized Poisson –Boltzmann (ALPB) implicit 

solvation 101 , while UMA -s-1.1 NNP 102 in the fairchem package was also used for comparison 

with GFN1 -xTB (See Supporting Information Figure S2). 

DFT calculations in QM cluster models .

All ab initio DFT energ ies and forces used in this simulation were ca lculated by the 

GPU -accelerated quantum chemistry code, TeraChem v1.9 22,103 -105 , at the B3LYP/6 -31G* 106,107 

level of theory with DFT -D3 dispersion correction 108 using default Becke –Johnson (BJ) 

damping 109 . A conductor -like screening model (C -PCM) for implicit solvation 110,111 with a 

dielectric constant of 10 was applied to the QM cluster to approximate the protein’s electrostatic 

environment. All 1.2×CM5 112,113 , Hirshfeld 114 , ADCH 115 , RESP 116 , and VDD 117 atomic charges 

used in this study were calculated based on the Molden files obtained from TeraChem output 

artifacts with Multiwfn 118,119 . We use the same charge -transfer analysis method for MTases as in 

our previous QM/MM studies 17,18,64 .6

Structure –reactivity study in cluster models with DFT and NNP .

Flexible scans of the clusters were run along the dCX reaction coordinate , starting from a n

optimized reactant geometry to a n anticipated dCX at the product state incrementally by 25 steps 

(Supporting Information Table S 6). For all geometry optimization involved in flexible scans, 

DFT calculations used the geomeTRIC optimizer 120 in TeraChem, and the wave function from 

the previous optimization step was used as the initial guess for the SCF to improve convergence 

to a smooth reaction coordinate , while NNP calculations used the L -BFGS optimizer 121 in ASE 

with our Enerzyme simulate submodule . The maximum force convergence criterion was set to 

4.5 ×10 –4 hartree ·Å–1 for both DFT and NNP optimizations. 

Nudged elastic band ( NEB ) calculation s of the clusters were run between pre -defined 

reactant and product structures. Initial images between the optimized reactant and product 

endpoint structures were interpolated with the image -dependent pair potential (IDPP) 

method 122,123 . The path was then optimized with the climbing -image NEB (CI -NEB) method 124 .

We interfaced ORCA 6.1.0 125 -127 as an external NEB optimizer 128 with TeraChem as the DFT 

energy/forces supplier by our Enerzymette orca_terachem_request submodule or Enerzyme 

as the NNP energy/forces supplier. For NNP calculations, we built a server -client mode to reduce 

the overhead of module loading and neural network initialization . That is, our Enerzyme listen 

submodule deployed a server for energy and forces calculation with a trained NNP, and our 

Enerzyme request submodule invoked the calculation and parsed the results for the ORCA 

NEB optimizer. 

During all geometry optimizations, flexible scans, and NEB calculations in the enzyme 

cluster model , protein backbone heavy atoms were fixed at their original positions to preserv e7

the structural influence of the protein backbone. To minimize the effects of initial conditions on 

the optimization results, both the DFT and NNPs were initializ ed from the same DFT -optimize d

endpoints required for flexible scans and NEBs. For NNP calculations, iterative scans and NEBs 

were fully automated by our Enerzymette enerzyme_scan and enerzyme_neb submodules. 

For DFT calculations, due to the substantial wall time per iteration, these workflows were 

manually managed using the same criterion. 

NNP architecture and training .

In this work, we used the message -passing GNN cores of PhysNet 129 , SpookyNet 130 , and 

MACE 131 NNPs with our customized pre -core and post -core layers (Supporting Information 

Table s S7 –S9 ). They were implemented in our Enerzyme package with the PyTorch 132 deep 

learning framework. The parameters of NNPs were optimized by minimizing the loss function 

with the AMSGra d variant of the Adam optimizer .133 During training, we used a linear learning 

rate scheduler with warmup and determined the termination of training by early stopping 134 . At 

each epoch before reaching the maximum epoch number, a judge score was evaluated on the 

validation set using NN parameters obtained from an exponential moving average (EMA) 135 , and 

the training was terminated if it hadn ’t improved for a patience interval of epochs. The judge 

score shared the same weighted -sum form and weights on output properties as the loss function 

(equation 1): 

𝑚 = 𝑤 𝐸 𝑚 𝐸 + 𝑤 𝑭 𝑚 𝑭 + 𝑤 𝝁 𝑚 𝝁 + 𝑤 𝑄 𝑚 𝑄 + 𝑤 𝑞 𝑚 𝑞 , (1) 8

where 𝑚 𝑥 is a metric term for a property 𝑥 (Supporting Information Table S10 ). After training, 

the model with the best judge score on the validation set is selected for downstream use. The 

whole training procedure was managed by the Enerzyme train submodule. 

3. Results .

3a. Standardized model enzyme construction and reactive NNP data generation .

We construct QM cluster models of MTase active sites and build their NNP datasets from 

efficient reactive event sampling with QM labels to study enzymatic reactions in MTases with 

DFT and NNP approaches (Figure 1). For this purpose, QM cluster construction needs to be 

reproducible and automated across different systems . For each QM cluster, we also need to 

sample the relevant PES in terms of both the reaction coordinate and other orthogonal degrees of 

freedom to train an accurate and stable NNP. Therefore, we first harnessed our code 

QuantumPDB 16 to build QM clusters of MTase s from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) around their 

reaction centers , including the cofactor SAM, the Mg 2+ ion 136 in catechol O-methyltransferases 

(COMT) , and a range of substrates , alongside QM clusters that we extracted from our previous 

QM/MM studies 64 (see Computational Details ). Then, we tailored an enhanced sampling 

protocol for MTase clusters to cover the entire reaction pathway while simultaneously generating 

diverse configurations of the surrounding catalytic environment. 9

Figure 1. An overview of data generation for SAM -MT enzyme cluster models. From a full 

SAM -MT structure in the PDB, we construct its cluster model by manual selection or an 

automat ed workflow with QuantumPDB. We use high -temperature steered MD to sample the 

configurations along reaction paths with efficient, reactive simulators, including semi -empirical 

QM methods or universal NNPs. The obtained structures are labeled by DFT with the implicit 

solvent model for their potential energy surface and charge distribution information. 

In our reactive sampling protocol, steered MD 137 is employed to overcome reaction 

barriers and enhance the rare reactive events . To sample orthogonal degrees of freedom, 

especially including molecular conformations and non -covalent interactions, we use a high 

temperature of 500 –1000 K during the steered MD run to promote their exploration. To maintain 

a suitably compact model of the enzyme active site throughout the simulation while allowing 10 

sufficient conformational flexibility , s oft restraints are applied between different molecular 

fragments (see Computational Details ). This approach yield s a stable trajectory with uniform 

data distribution across the reactant, transition, and product region s (Supporting Information 

Figure S1). These snapshoots from high -temperature MD can in turn be labeled with the same 

electronic structure method as in the reference QM cluster to obtain energies, forces, dipoles, and 

atomic charges in the NNP dataset (see Computational Details ).

The underlying interatomic potential of the reactive sampling must be able to describe 

bond breaking and bond formation, remain stable under high -temperature steered MD, and 

efficiently compute energies and forces for large -scale simulations . As an initial choice, we 

employ ed the xTB family of semi -empirical quantum chemistry methods 100,138 , which provide s a

good balance between reactivity description and computational efficiency. In practice, GFN1 -

xTB enables stable simulations at 500 –1000 K across multiple SAM -MT clusters and, with CPU 

parallelization, can complete 20,000 MD steps for a ~300 -atom cluster within 4 hours. However, 

xTB methods encounter difficulties when describing highly charged molecules, such as 

polyphosphate groups, leading to abnormal molecular geometries or instability in electronic 

structure calculations in some system s. During the course of this study, universal pretrained 

NNPs for reactive molecular systems became available . Indeed, we found that foundation models 

such as UMA 102 can more efficiently and accurately simulate reactive systems where xTB 

performs poorly, offering an alternative for robust and efficient sampling (Supporting 

Information Figure S2).

Overall, given structure of an enzyme -substrate complex, a specification on the substrate 

identi ty, a reactive interatomic potential, and an electronic structure code , our MTase model 11 

construction and NNP generation represent a standardized and theor y-agnostic procedure for the 

whole MTase family. 

3b. NNP framework s for mechanistic simulations in model enzymes .

Performing QM -cluster -like simulations with NNPs in a manner that can supplant DFT 

introduces new challenges due to the large size, structural complexity, and diverse physical 

information contained in enzyme QM cluster models . On one hand, such an NNP must not only 

fit the potential energy surface (PES) to drive molecular simulations , but to represent a true 

replacement of a DFT calculation, it must also model long -range electrostatics , describe 

distribution s of partial charges, and distinguish systems of different total charge . Furthermore, 

evaluating the NNP's reliability and stability for enzyme mechanistic studies in comparison to 

DFT calculations also requires testing on realistic QM -cluster simulation workflows, such as 

flexible scans and NEB calculations. To address these two challenges, we introduced two 

complementary frameworks : Enerzyme , an NNP development, training, and deployment 

platform that enables electrostatics -aware NNP simulations tailored for QM cluster models ; and 

Enerzymette , a workflow manager that standardizes iterative structure –reactivity exploration on 

complex enzyme cluster PESs and aligns NNP evaluations to identical DFT reaction -exploration 

tasks. 

For the challenges addressed by Enerzyme , we aim to modularly extend capabilities for 

charge prediction and electrostatic interactions (e.g., as implemented in PhysNet 129 and 

SpookyNet 130 ) to a broader range of GNN -based NNP architectures . We also adapt them 

specifically to QM clusters embedded in implicit solvent environments. We note that most 

modern GNN -based NNPs, despite architectural differences, follow a common framework that 12 

consists of elemental and geometric embeddings, message -passing interactions, and atomic 

energy readouts. Based on this observation, we developed Enerzyme with a modular NNP design 

mode (Supporting Information Figure S3 ). In Enerzyme, the core message -passing interactions 

are isolated as a component that maps molecular graph embeddings to atomic features. Pre -core 

layers encode and aggregate system -level information into the embedding space with the 

interface beyond elemental and geometric descriptors , while p ost -core layers decode atomic 

features into physical quantities, apply corrections or physical priors, and compute derived 

quantities . This modular design allows different NNP architectures to be extended beyond their 

original formulations, combining components from multiple models and enabling flexible 

construction of NNPs tailored to specific simulation tasks . In this work, we s pecifically exploit 

this framework to equip models with electrostatics adapted to QM clusters in implicit solvent 

environments (Figure 2 and Supporting Information Table S11 ).13 

Figure 2. An overview of studying reactivity in enzyme cluster models with electrostatics -aware 

NNPs. Left: We implemented NNPs in a modularized way in our Enerzyme package, where the 

key modules that equip an NNP with electrostatics are shown in blue . Right: We perform flexible 

scans or NEBs to study reactivity and evaluate NNPs using our Enerzymette workflow manager. 

A methyl -transfer reaction from an SAM sulfonium group to a nucleophilic atom X with 

hydrogen bond partners B is used to illustrate the reaction path. The workflow starts from a 

reactant conformation ( A) toward a product conformation ( C). Once it finds an intermediate 

structure ( B) as a local minimum inside the path, it cuts the path into segments at the local 

minimum and compares the current estimate of TS energies for both segments. It drops the 

segment that contains the TS of a lower energy ( TS1 ), keeps the segment that contains the TS of 

a higher energy ( TS2 ), and reboots the simulation based on the kept segment. It tracks the rate -

determining barrier on the complex PES of enzyme clusters by such iterative optimizations until 

convergence to an elementary reaction. 

First, a total -charge embedding is introduced in the pre -core layers to distinguish between 

clusters with different total charge s. After the message -passing phase, atomic features are 14 

decoded not only into atomic energies but also into atomic charges in the post -core layers ,

enabling the model to predict charge distributions as in electronic structure analysis . To ensure 

consistency with the total charge , 𝑄 , the raw atomic charge predictions 𝑞 ̃𝑖 are corrected as 

𝑞 𝑖 through a charge -conservation post -core layer with a linear rescaling (equation 2):

𝑞 𝑖 = 𝑞 ̃𝑖 − 1 

> 𝑁

(∑ 𝑞 ̃𝑖 𝑖 − 𝑄 ). (2)

The corrected atomic charges are then coupled back to the PES through a Coulomb potential 

post -core layer as a long -range electrostatic energy term (equation 3):

𝐸 ele = 1 

> 4𝜋 𝜖 0𝜖

∑ 𝑞 𝑖 𝑞 𝑗  

> 𝜒 (𝑟 𝑖𝑗 )𝑖 <𝑗

, (3)

where 𝜖 0 is the vacuum permittivity, 𝜖 is the relative dielectric constant , 𝑟 𝑖𝑗 is the distance 

between atom 𝑖 and 𝑗 , and 𝜒 is a damping function . Importantly, the electrostatic layer adopts the 

same dielectric screening 𝜖 = 10 as the implicit solvent model used in the QM cluster 

calculations , ensuring consistent long -range electrostatic behavior between the NNP and 

reference PES . A dipole calculation layer is additionally included in post -core layers to compute 

the molecular dipole moment 𝝁 from the predicted atomic charges and atomic positions 𝒓 𝑖 

(equation 4): 

𝝁 = ∑ 𝑞 𝑖 𝒓 𝑖 𝑖 . (4)

enabling multi -objective supervision (i.e., simultaneously training using information from) 

atomic charges on direct labels, electrostatic observables , and PES properties. The overall loss 

function is written as a weighted sum of loss terms over all predicted quantities (equation 5) :15 

ℓ = 𝑤 𝐸 ℓ𝐸 + 𝑤 𝑭 ℓ𝑭 + 𝑤 𝝁 ℓ𝝁 + 𝑤 𝑄 ℓ𝑄 + 𝑤 𝑞 ℓ𝑞 , (5)

where every regression loss term ℓ𝑥 is weighted by 𝑤 𝑥 , applying to each component of the 

property 𝑥 between its predicted value and the corresponding label in the training set, including 

total energy ( 𝐸 ), atomic forces ( 𝑭 ), dipole moment ( 𝝁 ), uncorrected total charge ( 𝑄 ), and 

corrected atomic charges ( 𝑞 ). For the atomic charge labels, w e chose the 1.2×CM5 scheme 

because they are also compatible with molecular mechanics electrostatics 113 . Thus, learning this 

charge scheme provides both physically grounded descriptors of charge redistribution along the 

reaction coordinate and a model of long -range electrostatic interactions as a component of the 

PES. This framework adapts the electrostatic architectures originally developed in PhysNet and 

SpookyNet to implicit solvent dielectric environments , while also enabling models without 

native electrostatics , like MACE 131 , to be equipped with the same electrostatic treatment .

For the challenges addressed by Enerzymette, the high dimensionality and ruggedness of 

enzyme -cluster PESs make identifying key reaction steps and transition states (TS) highly 

challenging , requiring development of more specialized, automated workflows . Flexible scans or 

NEB calculations frequently identify additional intermediates between the reactant and the 

product , such as hydrogen -bond network rearrangements and residue conformational changes, 

requiring extensive manual inspection and iterative restarting of simulations. Such manual 

intervention not only lessens the speed advantage of NNPs but also makes rigorous comparisons 

between DFT and NNP simulations inefficient and intractable . During flexible scans or NEB 

calculations automated by Enerzymette , when an intermediate local minimum is detected along 

the path, Enerzymette terminates the current optimization , records the intermediate as a newly 

found reactant or a product based on its relative position to the barrier within the reaction 16 

pathway . The code automatically reboots a new scan or NEB optimization on the side with the 

higher barrier until a single elementary reaction is obtained (Figure 2, Supporting Information 

Figure s S4 and S5 ). This iterative workflow effectively tracks the rate -determining TS (i.e. , the 

highest -energy barrier) while recording the explored local minima in reactant and product 

regions. 

We note that on such high -dimensional PESs, the multistep optimization, stopping, and 

restarting procedures in iterative NEB s become extremely sensitive to the optimizer and the 

workflow . To isolate the influence of the PES itself from these simulation factors, we align the 

optimizer and workflow manager between DFT and NNP simulations as closely as possible. 

Specifically, Enerzymette interfaces ORCA as an external optimizer with both TeraChem and 

Enerzyme. In this framework, DFT in TeraChem and the NNP in Enerzyme only provide the 

energies and forces required by the optimizer, while the optimizer generates initial guesses, 

updates structures, and notifies the workflow manager of intermediate detection s to terminate the 

current run (Supporting Information Figure S6 ). This design minimizes differences beyond the 

PES itself. 

Furthermore , even if an NNP reproduces the DFT PES locally, small deviations may 

significantly affect the subsequent optimization trajectories . Instead, w e focus on whether the 

NNP maintains the key mechanistic observables relevant to enzymatic reaction studies. Based on 

the intermediates and approximate TS identified from iterative scans or NEB calculations, we 

compute the overall energy span and reaction energy change as the primary energetic metric s.

After an iterative scan or NEB converges, the energy difference between the lowest -energy 

product and lowest -energy reactant is defined as the reaction energy, while the energy difference 

between the estimated rate -determining transition state and the lowest -energy reactant is defined 17 

as the energy span of the reaction. These quantities characterize the kinetic and thermodynamic 

behavior of the reaction while reducing sensitivity to minor PES differences . For structural 

metrics , we examine the geometry of the reaction center in the S N2 methyl transfer mechanism ,

focusing on the attacking angle and the forming and breaking bond distances that characterize 

the TS (Figure 3) . Besides the PES, we also evaluate whether our NNP -predicted atomic charges 

capture the charge redistribution between reactants , polarization of surrounding residues along 

the reaction coordinate, and the relationship between substrate charge and reactivity . We 

consider these metrics to representatively reflect the practical requirements of structure –

reactivity studies in enzyme QM cluster models. 

Figure 3. The reaction scheme in SAM -MT enzymes and the reaction center geometry of the 

transition state. Left: The SAM -MT has an S-Adenosyl -Methionine (SAM) cofactor as the 

methyl group donor that transfers the methyl group from its sulfonium group to the nucleophilic 

atom X of the substrate. The X is typically O, N, C, or S, and may be deprotonated by a base 

(denoted by B in the scheme) and coordinate with a metal atom (denoted by M in the scheme). 

Right: We use 3 local geometry descriptors to characterize the transition state in our evaluation 

of the NNPs. dSC is the distance between the SAM ’s sulfonium sulfur atom S (in yellow) and the 

methyl carbon atom C (in gray), and dCX is the distance between the methyl carbon atom C and 

the nucleophilic atom X of the substrate (a nitrogen in blue as an example here). ∠SCX is the S N2

attacking angle between the S, C, and X atoms. 

3c. Benchmarking neural network PES s of enzyme cluster model s in mechanistic 

simulations .18 

We first evaluated Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE NNP s trained on a 

specific QM cluster dataset and tested on the same system. Here we introduced two MTase s that 

were previously investigated in our mechanistic QM/MM stud y64 : PfPMT , the 

phosphoethanolamine methyltransferase in Plasmodium falciparum 139 , and HcgC , a gene product 

of the hcg C gene cluster responsible for the methyl transfer in the iron guanylylpyridinol 

cofactor biosynthesis 86 . After extracting QM cluster models from the QM regions in the 

QM/MM study , the PfPMT system features an N-methyltransferase with a 284 -atom cluster, 

while the HcgC system features a C-methyltransferase with a 545 -atom cluster. Therefore, this 

test evaluates the accuracy of Enerzyme methods on distinct MTase nucleophile identities and 

substantially different system sizes . During iterative NEB simulations, both NNP s remain stable 

throughout the optimization process and successfully converge to chemically reasonable reaction 

pathways. On the 284 -atom PfPMT cluster, both models reproduce the DFT reaction energy and 

kinetic barrier within 3.5 kcal/mol, while Enerzyme -SpookyNet achieves a kinetic barrier error 

below 0.5 kcal/mol. When extended to the larger 545 -atom HcgC cluster, both models maintain 

stable simulations and predict the reaction kinetic barrier within 2.5 kcal/mol of the DFT 

reference , but Enerzyme -MACE shows a notably higher error on the reaction energy of 5.9 

kcal/mol (Figure 4 and Supporting Information Table S12 ).19 

Figure 4. NEB -Estimated TS structures of the reaction center of methyl group transfer in HcgC 

and PfPMT cluster models by the reference DFT and Enerzyme -NNPs. The chemical structures 

of the methylated substrates in both enzymes are shown on the left with the transferred methyl 

group in green. dSC , dCX , and ∠SCX are the local geometry descriptors defined in Figure 3 . Color 

scheme: carbon in gray, hydrogen in white, oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, sulfur in yellow, and 

phosphorus in orange. 

We next extend ed th is system -specific training and evaluation to five catechol O-

methyltransferase (COMT) 140 cluster models that are around 300 atoms in size, which we 

constructed from PDB structures using QuantumPDB. Although these clusters all have the same 

enzyme identity , the protein -ligand complexes span chemically diverse ligand s ranging from 

near -native substrate s to inactive inhibitors (Scheme 1 ). Comparing NNP flexible scans on the 

same individual structures used to generate the DFT results , Enerzyme -SpookyNet achieves an 

average error of 1.6 kcal/mol on kinetic barriers and 4.4 kcal/mol on reaction energies. 

Enerzyme -MACE achieves an average kinetic barrier error of 1.4 kcal/mol and an average 

reaction energy error of 2.9 kcal/mol (Supporting Information Figure S7 ). These errors 

correspond to both over - and underestimates with no clear bias from the NNPs. These results 20 

demonstrate the robustness of combining automated QM cluster construction with QuantumPDB 

and NNP training within the Enerzyme framework for enzyme cluster simulations. 

Scheme 1 . Ligand structures and their associated PDB IDs for the protein -ligand complex crystal 

structures of the 5 COMT systems used in the Enerzyme -NNP system -specific evaluations . The 

nucleophilic atoms in the methyl transfer reactions are colored. 

We also examine d whether currently available universal NNPs for finite -size molecular 

systems, including UMA 102 and MACE -mh 141 , can directly replace DFT calculations in these 

QM cluster models without system -specific training 142 . However, single -point energy 

evaluations on DFT flexible scan trajectories show that these models tend to significantly 

overestimate the reaction barriers compared to system -specific models trained in Enerzyme 

(Figure 5) . This behavior suggests that universal NNPs trained on vacuum PESs cannot be 

directly transferred to QM cluster models under implicit solvent conditions, highlighting the 

necessity of targeted retraining on system -specific electronic structure data. 21 

Figure 5. Single -point energy evaluation of NNPs along DFT flexible scan trajectories in COMT, 

HcgC, and PfPMT cluster models. The COMT cluster comes from PDB ID 2ZVJ. The initial 

energies of different energy curves are aligned to be the same, and the root mean square errors 

(RMSE) are calculated between the energy curves of each NNP and the reference DFT after 

energy alignment. The reaction coordinate is the difference between the breaking bond length 

and the forming bond length dCX –dSC (defined in Figure 3) .

Beyond energetics, correct characterization of transition -state structures is critical for 

mechanistic studies. We find that the models can accurately reproduce the local geometries of 

DFT transition states in NEB simulations (Figure 4) . In the PfPMT system, Enerzyme -

SpookyNet reproduces the forming and breaking bond lengths at the transition state within 0.05 

Å, while Enerzyme -MACE exhibits larger deviations in bond lengths. Nevertheless, both models 

predict the nucleophilic attack angle within 2° of the DFT reference. The larger structural 

deviation of Enerzyme -MACE is caused by a prediction of a too -late transition state (i.e., the 

leaving methyl group is too close to the amino nitrogen nucleophile) despite good prediction of 

the angle in the TS. In the larger HcgC system, both models achieve bond -length errors below 

0.04 Å and maintain attack -angle deviations within 2°, consistent with the expected S N2 TS 

geometry formed in the enzyme environment. 22 

Despite the thousands of degrees of freedom involved in these QM cluster models , the 

global structures obtained from NNP and DFT geometry optimizations and NEB calculations 

remain highly consistent when starting from the same initial structures. For the PfPMT cluster, 

the root mean square deviation (RMSD) of all unconstrained atoms between NNP - and DFT -

optimized reactant, product, and TS structures is around 0.5 Å. For the larger 545 -atom HcgC 

cluster, the agreement is even stronger, with RMSDs of only 0.2 –0. 4 Å (Supporting Information 

Table S13) . These results indicate that Enerzyme -NNPs can learn high -quality PES landscapes 

for enzyme cluster models from fewer than 1000 steered -MD configurations and drive stable and 

reliable reaction -path exploration in large SAM -MT clusters. 

To test whether the stability of NNP -driven NEB simulations in enzyme cluster models 

imposes stricter requirements on the local details and global landscape of the PES than simpler 

tasks such as single -point energy prediction or geometry optimization, we additionally trained a 

set of Enerzyme -PhysNet models with a smaller capacity (i.e., fewer trainable parameters) and a 

simpler architecture. Although these models exhibit satisfactory performance in simpler single 

point energy evaluation tasks, they fail in more demanding NEB simulations. We first f in d that 

single -point energy accuracy of reaction barriers cannot reliably predict NEB stability, even 

when the evaluation is already performed on DFT flexible scan trajectories. For single -point 

energy evaluation on a DFT -scan trajectory of the HcgC cluster , Enerzyme -PhysNet shows an 

RMSE of 4.3 kcal/mol using the initial reactant energy to align the PESs , which is very similar to 

3.6 kcal/mol from Enerzyme -SpookyNet, yet fails to converge to a correct TS structure during 

NEB (Supporting Information Figure S8 ). In addition, although both flexible scans and NEB 

provide an assessment of NNP fidelity along reaction pathways, scan accuracy alone still cannot 

reflect NEB reliability. In the PfPMT system, Enerzyme -PhysNet reproduces the kinetic barrier 23 

and reaction energy within approximately 2 kcal/mol in flexible scan simulations but still fails to 

converge to the correct transition -state structure in NEB calculations (Supporting Information 

Figure S9 ). These observations indicate that NEB simulations are more demanding on PES 

quality , which may not be revealed by single -point metrics or simpler scanning procedures. 

Therefore, evaluating NNPs in realistic NEB workflows is essential for assessing their reliability 

in practical reaction mechanism studies. 

3d. The role of electrostatics in Enerzyme -NNPs for enzyme cluster models .

Electrostatic interactions play a central role in enzyme catalysis . In SAM -dependent 

methyltransferases, the SAM cofactor itself is highly polarized because its charge is concentrated 

across the sulfonium center, carboxylate, and amino moieties. Together with highly charged 

substrate motifs such as phosphates in PfPMT or Mg 2+ -coordinated phenols in COMTs , this 

leads to complex charge distributions and long -range electrostatic interactions that strongly 

influence the reaction. Therefore, we studied how the electrostatic components in Enerzyme -

NNPs influence their accuracy and interpretability in MTase cluster models .

First, w e find that direct supervision of atomic charges (i.e., including atomic charges in 

the loss function) is essential for structure -reactivity simulations in enzyme clusters (Figure 6) . In 

both the PfPMT and HcgC systems, reducing the atomic -charge supervision weight by two 

orders of magnitude (Qa1 in Figure 6) significantly increases the NEB energy and structural 

errors. In several cases, the large structural errors are so severe that the models fail to converge 

to a reasonable TS structure . These observations indicate that direct supervision on electronic 

charge distributions is not merely aligning the model outputs to electronic structure analysis but 24 

is shaping the detail of the reactive PES of highly polarized enzyme cluster environments for 

stable and chemically meaningful simulations .

Figure 6. NEB performance for SpookyNet and MACE trained on PfPMT and HcgC enzyme 

cluster structures with different electrostatic settings in Enerzyme. “Qa1 ” stands for weak 

supervision on atomic charges, using a loss weight of 1 instead of 100 in the control (i.e., default) 

NNP . “eps1 ” stands for using a dielectric constant of 1 instead of 10 in the control NNP models .

The energy change error is the error of the energy difference between the lowest -energy product 

structure and the lowest -energy reactant structure found in the NEB. The energy span error is the 

error of the energy difference between the highest -energy barrier and the lowest -energy reactant 

structure found in the NEB. ΔdSC and ΔdCX denote the errors in the bond -length metrics dSC and 

dCX (defined in Figure 3) of the TS structure estimated by CI -NEB, respectively. The TS ∠SCX 

error is the error of the attacking angle metric (defined in Figure 3) of the TS structure estimated 

by CI -NEB. All errors are calculated using the DFT results at the same level of theory as the 

NNP training data with the same CI -NEB protocol as the ground -truth reference. 

Second, i n our QM cluster calculations, the systems are embedded in implicit solvent 

environments rather than vacuum, and the electrostatic interactions are therefore screened by a 

finite dielectric constant representing the protein environment. We find that using an inconsistent 

dielectric constant substantially degrades the quality of NEB simulations (Figure 6) . In both the 25 

PfPMT and HcgC systems, using no dielectric screening (i.e., vacuum labeled eps1 in Figure 6) 

also leads to significantly larger errors in reaction energetics and TS geometries. These 

observations demonstrate that long -range electrostatic interactions in enzyme clusters cannot be 

treated independently from the dielectric environment in which the reference electronic structure 

calculations are performed. When coupling charge distribution with PES, incorporating 

physically consistent electrostatic priors into the NNP architecture is therefore essential for 

obtaining contributive electrostatic components in the reactive PES .

The atomic charges as coordinate -dependent functions learned together with the PES 

serve as dynamic descriptors of electronic structure evolution along the reaction pathway. In our 

multi -objective supervision, the predicted atomic charges are also guided by the dipole objective 

and coupled with the potential energy surface, in addition to the supervision on the reference 

atomic charge labels . Thus, we evaluate their validity through their general trends and correlation 

with the reference, DFT -derived atomic charge (i.e. , 1.2 ×CM5) trends on the same reaction 

trajectories instead of the accuracy of reproducing the reference charge scheme .

We examine d the charge transfer within the reaction center, including the SAM cofactor 

and substrate , and also evaluated the role of surrounding residues . Consistent with our previous 

analysis in QM/MM studies, we observe substantial positive charge transfer from the SAM 

cofactor to the substrate during methyl transfer, while significant charge separation is preserved 

near the TS region (Figure 7) . Specifically, in the PfPMT system, the model with a reduc ed 

atomic -charge supervision weight (Qa1in Figure 7) exhibits too -conservative charge predictions ,

although models employing incorrect dielectric constants (eps1 in Figure 7) still qualitatively 

reproduce these charge -transfer and polarization trends . This latter model underestimat es both 

the degree of charge transfer between the cofactor and substrate and the extent of charge 26 

separation. In the PfPMT system, the NNP predictions with full charge supervision also 

reproduce trends in charges of nearby amino acid residues with strong correlations to the 

reference DFT charge variations (Figure 7) . However, when the atomic -charge supervision 

weight is reduced (Qa1 in Figure 7) , the correlation for several residues , including TYR9 and 

HID122, degrades significantly . These observations suggest that direct supervision of atomic 

charges improves the model’s ability to resolve fine -grained electronic structure variations inside 

complex enzyme clusters. 27 

Figure 7 . The analysis of charge -transfer and polarization effect s from NNP -predicted atom 

charges. Top: the correlation between selected residue charges (summed atomic charges) 

predicted by the Enerzyme -NNPs and the one obtained from electronic structure analysis during 

single -point predictions along the reference -DFT flexible scan trajectory of the PfPMT cluster. 

The y-axis is Pearson ’s r2 coefficient, and the x-axis is grouped by the residue names in and 

around the reaction center. Both Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE models are tested 

with different electrostatic settings in Enerzyme. “Qa1 ” stands for weak supervision on atomic 

charges, using a loss weight of 1 instead of 100 in the control NNP models . “eps1 ” stands for 

using a dielectric constant of 1 instead of 10 in the control NNP models . Bottom left: the charge -

transfer analysis of the methyl transfer between SAM258 and OPE257 on the same reference -

DFT flexible scan trajectory (See Computational details). The Qa1, control, and eps1 NNP 

models follow the same naming convention, and the reference curve stands for the 1.2×CM5 

charges. Bottom right: an illustration of the selected residue s in and around the PfPMT reaction 

center with their residue names and reactant -like geometry. Color scheme: carbon in gray, 

hydrogen in white, oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, sulfur in yellow, and phosphorus in orange. 

As electronic structure descriptors , the NNP -predicted atomic charges also reflect 

chemically meaningful reactivity trends in methyl transfer reactions. We compared five COMT 

cluster systems with chemically diverse substrates (Scheme 1) . The predicted charge on the 

nucleophilic atom reflects the substituent effects of functional groups on the aromatic rings and 

hetero atoms and exhibits strong correlations with both the reaction barriers and reaction energy 

changes obtained from the same NNP -driven scans for each of these substrates . Interestingly, 

these correlations are more pronounced than those obtained from conventional DFT -derived 

atomic charge schemes, even including the reference 1.2×CM5 charges used during training 

(Figure 8 and Supporting Information F igure S10 ). Some charge -fitting procedures , such as 

RESP , prioritize reproducing the global electrostatic potential around the molecular surface, 

which can ignore detailed charge concentration features buried deep inside enzyme clusters. In 

contrast, our Enerzyme -NNP is simultaneously constrained by global observables, local atomic 

supervision, and PES consistency during training. This multi -level supervision enables learning a 

charge representation that capture s subtle electronic effects associated with reactivity, suggesting 28 

that the NNP develops a chemically interpretable electronic descriptor based on a predefined 

atomic charge scheme (i.e. 1.2×CM5 ) and maintains or even surpasses its predictive power on 

reactivity .

Figure 8. The correlation between the partial charge of the nucleophilic atom of COMT 

substrates and the reaction barrier and the reaction energy change. For all systems from 5 PDB 

IDs (Scheme 1), their reaction barriers and atomic charges obtained from reference DFT flexible 

scan s and an Enerzyme NNP flexible scan with atomic charge prediction are shown with a 

legend corresponding to each system at the top left. The four charge schemes are colored 

according to the legend at the top right: Enerzyme -MACE (red), Enerzyme -SpookyNet (blue), 

1.2xCM5 (black), and RESP (orange). Left: The lines show the linear regression between the 

predicted reaction barrier of the 5 systems and the predicted nucleophilic atom charge with 

corresponding markers for different PDB IDs . Right: The Pearson r coefficients for the linear 

regression between the predicted reaction barrier/reaction energy change for the 5 systems and 

the predicted nucleophilic atom charge across different charge schemes. 

3e. Evaluating generaliza bility and computational cost of Enerzyme -NNPs .

To amortize the cost of quantum chemistry dataset labeling and model training, it is 

desirable that a single NNP achieve s reliable accuracy across multiple enzyme -substrate systems. 29 

Even if across the same enzyme family, like MTases, this requires generalization over both 

perturbations in active site protein environments and the broad chemical diversity of substrates. 

To assess this transferability, we performed cross -evaluation on various COMT cluster models 

with distinct structure sources and different substrate identities .

We first investigate the zero -shot transferability of a model trained on a specific COMT 

cluster dataset to the iterative flexible scan simulation of other COMT clusters. We find that the 

transferability of both Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE remains strongly dependent 

on substrate chemistry and reaction energetics. In particular, models trained on other systems 

perform substantially worse on the 2ZVJ complex than models trained directly on 2ZVJ itself. 

For example, compared to the Enerzyme -SpookyNet model trained on 2ZVJ, which yields only 

+2. 2 kcal/mol energy -span error and +1. 7 kcal/mol reaction -energy error, models trained on 

4XUD, 4XUE, and 7XJB significantly overestimate the reaction barrier of 2ZVJ by +7. 1, +7. 9,

and +9.9 kcal/mol, respectively, while the reaction -energy errors further increase to +9.3, +14.8, 

and +15. 5 kcal/mol ( Supporting Information Figure S7 ). Enerzyme -MACE exhibits similar 

behavior. 

One possible explanation is that the models become specialized toward the characteristic 

functional groups in the ligand present in their own training set , including the boronic acid in 

4XUD, the pyridone in 4XUE, and the chlorine, nitro group, and oxadiazole motifs in 7XJB, but 

they fail to generalize to the distinct pyranone -like scaffold of 2ZVJ. In addition, 2ZVJ has the 

lowest DFT barrier and most exergonic reaction energy among the five systems, suggesting that 

models trained on the other systems may partially overfit their respective energetic trends and 

therefore systematically overestimate the TS and product energies, rather than learning a 

generalized description of how phenolic nucleophile reactivity depends on chemical environment. 30 

In contrast, models trained on the 6LFE system exhibit substantially better transferability 

to 2ZVJ. For example, the Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE models trained on 6LFE 

produce only +0.1 and +2. 7 kcal/mol barrier errors on 2ZVJ, respectively. This improved 

transferability likely originates from the greater chemical similarity between the 6LFE and 2ZVJ 

ligands , as well as their similar reaction -energy trends. Overall, Enerzyme -MACE demonstrates 

stronger zero -shot generalization than Enerzyme -SpookyNet. Averaged over the four models 

trained on other systems and evaluated on 2ZVJ, Enerzyme -MACE achieves mean barrier and 

reaction -energy errors of 5.9 and 10.0 kcal/mol, slightly better than the corresponding 6.2 and 

11.1 kcal/mol errors of Enerzyme -SpookyNet. The difference becomes more pronounced when 

transferring to the 4XUE system, where Enerzyme -MACE reaches only 2.3 kcal/mol average 

barrier error and 2.8 kcal/mol average reaction -energy error, significantly outperforming 

Enerzyme -SpookyNet with corresponding errors of 5.8 and 8.9 kcal/mol. Interestingly, the 

Enerzyme -MACE model trained on the nitrogen -free 2ZVJ system still generalizes reasonably to 

the nitrogen -containing heterocycle of 4XUE , with a barrier error of only +0.80 kcal/mol. This 

behavior suggests that Enerzyme -MACE may partially transfer chemically relevant information 

from similar but common motifs in amino acids , such as the tryptophan residue, whereas 

Enerzyme -SpookyNet fails to generalize similarly and instead underestimates the 4XUE barrier 

by 9.17 kcal/mol. 

Overall, t hese observations suggest that models trained on single enzyme –substrate 

systems are insufficient for a reliable application across the broad chemical space of small -

molecule ligands. We therefore further investigate whether NNPs can extract transferable 

chemical knowledge from combined datasets of multiple enzyme –substrate systems. To this end, 

we combined the datasets from five COMT systems (Scheme 1 ) and train ed models using a31 

subset that include s 200 structures per system with a training/validation ratio of 7:1, which in 

total has the same size (1000 structures) as the system -specific training . We also experimented 

with 2× and 4× data r atio s, which correspond to 400 and 800 structures per system, respectively. 

In addition to the performance on the five systems present in the combined dataset, we further 

benchmark the resulting models on four additional COMT systems containing ligands 

completely absent from the training set (Supporting Information Figure S11 ). Those models 

show promising accuracy in the reaction barrier estimation with iterative flexible scans , and their 

in -dataset performance can be systematically improve d by scaling up the dataset. Trained on the 

4× datasets , Enerzyme -SpookyNet reaches 1.7 kcal/mol average barrier error on the in -dataset 

systems, already approaching the previously obtained 1.6 kcal/mol error achieved by separately 

trained , single -system models using 875 structures for each system. Furthermore , using only 175 

structures per system, corresponding to the same total dataset size as the original single -system 

training sets, Enerzyme -MACE achieves 2.2 kcal/mol average in -dataset barrier error, which is 

comparable to the 1.4 kcal/mol error obtained from individually trained models. Enerzyme -

MACE consistently exhibits higher overall data efficiency than Enerzyme -SpookyNet, as it 

achieves a 2 kcal/mol out -of -dataset error with the 1 × data ratio, whereas Enerzyme -SpookyNet 

requires the 4× data ratio and 1.5 × more total cost (Figure 9 and Supporting Information Table 

S14) . Among all the models, out -of -dataset errors remain comparable to in -dataset errors, 

indicating that they indeed learn generalized chemical knowledge about reactivity trends within 

the COMT ligand chemical space. We also observe that , for Enerzyme -MACE trained on the 

largest dataset, the out -of -dataset accuracy becomes slightly worse than that of those trained on 

smaller datasets , warning that it may already begin to overfit the training systems. 32 

Figure 9. Accuracy –cost trade -offs of Enerzyme -NNPs in iterative scan simulations on COMT 

cluster models . Left: The x-axis reports the total GPU hours of a complete Enerzyme -NNP 

workflow, while the y-axis reports the mean absolute error (MAE) of reaction energy barriers 

relative to the reference DFT calculations. Dashed and dotted vertical lines indicate the total 

GPU time cost of the corresponding iterative scans directly with the reference DFT calculations. 

Right: Breakdown of the total GPU hours of the complete Enerzyme -NNP workflow into dataset 

labeling, model training, and iterative scan inference at different dataset scales. 

As we scale d up the dataset size, we also analyze d the cost of the full workflow on a 

single NVIDIA V100 32GB GPU , including dataset labeling, model training, and iterative scan 

simulations at different dataset sizes , and compare d it with the DFT cost with the same 

computational units . The iterative scan inference cost of 9 systems in total is no more than 1 hour 

for all models, highlighting that NNPs enable the acceleration of DFT simulation by 2 –3 orders 

of magnitude, which would have required 712 hours in total . When taking labeling and training 

costs into account, f or relatively lightweight models such as Enerzyme -SpookyNet, quantum 

chemistry labeling dominates the computational (78% with 1 × data ratio, Figure 9) . In contrast, 

for larger -capacity architectures such as Enerzyme -MACE, model training itself becomes the 

major computational bottleneck (73% with 1 × data ratio, Figure 9) . Due to training instability, 33 

we employed highly conservative learning -rate schedules and early -stopping strategies, inflating 

the training cost of Enerzyme -MACE. As a result, the largest Enerzyme -MACE model becomes 

more expensive (1077 hours) than directly performing DFT iterative scans on all nine COMT 

systems (712 hours) . Therefore, both the efficiency and accuracy of Enerzyme -MACE still have 

considerable room for improvement through better training strategies and hyperparameter 

optimization. But still, both Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE are able to achieve a 2 

kcal/mol accuracy in 186 and 127 hours for both in -dataset and out -of -dataset systems, 

respectively, which are cheaper than the 460 -hour DFT simulation on those 9 systems . Our 

results suggest the potential of scaling a generalizable NNP with reacti on data sets of more 

diverse enzyme s and applying it to more unseen systems. While the NNP -driven simulation 

remains consistently far cheaper than DF T-driven , the DFT labeling and model training cost can 

be amortized across a larger number of target systems and downstream tasks, making the 

advantage of NNP increasingly significant .

4. Conclusions 

In this work, we developed an integrated framework for NNP -driven mechanistic 

simulations in QM cluster models that we demonstrated on representative MTases . We combin ed 

automated QM -cluster construction, reactive dataset generation, electrostatics -aware NNP 

modules , and iterative reaction -path exploration . These advances enabled NNP development and 

evaluation for structure –reactivity workflows , as automated through our Enerzyme and 

Enerzymette software packages, and established a practical route to accelerate QM -level 

simulations , as demonstrated on M Tases . Across the studied MTase cluster models up to 500 

atoms , Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -MACE trained on fewer than 1,000 cluster 

structures for a specific system reproduced DFT reaction energetics and TS structures with good 34 

accuracy. We also show ed that realistic mechanistic studies impose stricter requirements on PES 

quality than conventional single -point metrics. Therefore, future NNP development in reactive 

simulation, such as catalysis and combustion studies, should emphasize these types of 

evaluation s.

Our results further demonstrate d that electrostatic information is essential for enzyme -

cluster NNPs. Direct supervision of atomic charges and dielectric screening alignment with QM 

cluster models both substantially improve d the stability and accuracy of NEB simulations, while 

the charge distributions learned under multitask training provided a consistent description of 

charge transfer and polarization . Furthermore, the predicted atomic charge of the nucleophilic 

atoms exhibited high correlation with reaction energetics across a wide range of chemistry in 

COMT enzymes, highlighting its chemically meaningful insights as a reactivity descriptor .

The emergence of transferability across chemically distinct COMT substrates suggests 

that NNPs begin to learn generalized biochemical reactivity patterns as training datasets are 

expand ed to chemically diverse systems. Extending this framework to additional enzyme 

families , reaction mechanism s, and substrate chemistry will lead to transferable representations 

of enzymatic reactivity across broader biochemical space. At the same time, continued advances 

in NNP architecture s, active learning strategies , and the adaptation of NNP foundation models to 

QM cluster settings may substantially reduce the cost of data labeling and model training 

required for system -specific applications. With increasingly transferable NNPs and automat ed 

workflows , we anticipate that QM -level simulations of enzyme cluster models can be deployed 

at a scale that is currently intractable with conventional electronic structure methods. More 

broadly, the strategies developed here for learning and evaluating reactive PES in large -scale, 

complex biochemical environments may inspire future ML/MM embedding approaches and 35 

eventually tractable NNP -driven simulations of full biomolecular complexes in aqueous 

solutions , enabling more comprehensive and predictive modeling of enzymatic reactivity. Such 

advances in efficiency may enable large -scale mechanistic studies, muta nt screening, and 

substrate -design campaigns across enzyme families while retaining the interpretability and 

chemical insight of quantum chemistry. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Data and code availability 

The Enerzyme code with i nitial QM cluster structures and workflow input files are provided in 

the Zenodo repository at the DOI https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21018797 and the GitHub repo 

https://github.com/Benzoin96485/Enerzyme . The Enerzymette code is provided in the Zenodo 

repository at the DOI https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21018916 and the GitHub repo 

https://github.com/Benzoin96485/Enerzymette .

Supporting Information . Detailed configurations for QM cluster construction, molecular 

simulations, and NNP training; workflow implementation and algorithms; additional molecular 

structures, computational results , and data analysis . This material is available free of charge via 

the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

*email:hjkulik@mit.edu 

Notes 

## The authors declare no competing financial interest. 36 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National 

Institutes of Health under award number R35GM152027 (to H.J.K. and W.L .). Partial support 

was provided by the MIT Office of Research Computing and Data (ORCD) Seed Fund (to H.J.K. 

and W.L.) and Molecular Sciences Software Institute (MolSSI) Software Fellowship Program (to 

W.L.). The authors acknowledge MIT SuperCloud at Lincoln Laboratory Supercomputing 

Center and MIT Engaging at ORCD for providing HPC and c onsultation resources that have 

contributed to the research results reported within this paper. 

REFERENCES 

(1) Knowles, J. R. Enzyme catalysis: not different, just better. Nature 1991, 350 , 121 -124. 

(2) Bell, E. L.; Finnigan, W.; France, S. P.; Green, A. P.; Hayes, M. A.; Hepworth, L. J.; 

Lovelock, S. L.; Niikura, H.; Osuna, S.; Romero, E.; Ryan, K. S.; Turner, N. J.; Flitsch, S. 

L. Biocatalysis. Nat Rev Methods Primers 2021, 1, 46. 

(3) Hammes, G. G.; Benkovic, S. J.; Hammes -Schiffer, S. Flexibility, Diversity, and 

Cooperativity: Pillars of Enzyme Catalysis. Biochemistry 2011, 50 , 10422 -10430. 

(4) S. Chaturvedi, S.; Bím, D.; Z. Christov, C.; N. Alexandrova, A. From random to rational: 

improving enzyme design through electric fields, second coordination sphere interactions, 

and conformational dynamics. Chemical Science 2023, 14 , 10997 -11011. 

(5) Eberhart, M. E.; Alexandrova, A. N.; Ajmera, P.; Bím, D.; Chaturvedi, S. S.; Vargas, S.; 

Wilson, T. R. Methods for Theoretical Treatment of Local Fields in Proteins and 

Enzymes. Chem. Rev. 2025, 125 , 3772 -3813. 

(6) Ahmadi, S.; Barrios Herrera, L.; Chehelamirani, M.; Hostaš, J.; Jalife, S.; Salahub, D. R. 

Multiscale modeling of enzymes: QM -cluster, QM/MM, and QM/MM/MD: A tutorial 

review. International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2018, 118 , e25558. 

(7) Vennelakanti, V.; Nazemi, A.; Mehmood, R.; Steeves, A. H.; Kulik, H. J. Harder, better, 

faster, stronger: Large -scale QM and QM/MM for predictive modeling in enzymes and 

proteins. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2022, 72 , 9 -17. 

(8) Siegbahn, P. E. M.; Himo, F. The quantum chemical cluster approach for modeling 

enzyme reactions. WIREs Computational Molecular Science 2011, 1, 323 -336. 

(9) Himo, F.; de Visser, S. P. Status report on the quantum chemical cluster approach for 

modeling enzyme reactions. Commun Chem 2022, 5, 1 -4. 

(10) Sheng, X.; Himo, F. The Quantum Chemical Cluster Approach in Biocatalysis. Acc. 

Chem. Res. 2023, 56 , 938 -947. 37 

(11) Zhang, Y.; Cao, Y.; de Visser, S. P. Vitamin D3 Activation by Cytochrome P450 

Enzymes: Differences between Bacterial and Human Calcitriol Biosynthesis. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2025, 147 , 36898 -36910. 

(12) Chatterjee, R.; Balhara, R.; Jindal, G. Electrostatic Edge: Decrypting the Near -Perfect 

Catalytic Efficiency of Fumarase. ACS Catal. 2025, 15 , 1739 -1752. 

(13) Xu, M.; Kastner, D. W.; Luo, W.; Li, F. -S.; Müller, P.; Sun, Y.; Huang, W.; Glinkerman, 

C. M.; Guempel, M.; Kulik, H. J.; Weng, J. -K. Mammalian -like steroidogenesis in plants 

gives rise to endocrine -mimetic cardenolides. Science Advances 2026, 12 , eaeb5460. 

(14) Summers, T. J.; Cheng, Q.; Palma, M. A.; Pham, D. -T.; Kelso, D. K.; Webster, C. E.; 

DeYonker, N. J. Cheminformatic quantum mechanical enzyme model design: A 

catechol -O-methyltransferase case study. Biophysical Journal 2021, 120 , 3577 -3587. 

(15) DeYonker, N. J. Rigorous and reproducible computational enzymology: The RINRUS 

software toolkit. Biophysical Journal 2024, 123 , 548a -549a. 

(16) Kastner, D. W.; Luo, W.; Ho, W.; Reinhardt, C. R.; Keys, A.; Kulik, H. J. QuantumPDB: 

A Workflow for High -Throughput Quantum Cluster Model Generation from Protein 

Structures. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2026, 66 , 6011 -6026. 

(17) Kulik, H. J.; Zhang, J.; Klinman, J. P.; Martínez, T. J. How Large Should the QM Region 

Be in QM/MM Calculations? The Case of Catechol O -Methyltransferase. J. Phys. Chem. 

B 2016, 120 , 11381 -11394. 

(18) Kulik, H. J. Large -scale QM/MM free energy simulations of enzyme catalysis reveal the 

influence of charge transfer. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20 , 20650 -20660. 

(19) Tantillo, D. J.; Jiangang, C.; Houk, K. N. Theozymes and compuzymes: theoretical 

models for biological catalysis. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 1998, 2, 743 -750. 

(20) Agbaglo, D. A.; Summers, T. J.; Cheng, Q.; DeYonker, N. J. The Influence of Model 

Building Schemes and Molecular Dynamics Sampling on QM -cluster Models: The 

Chorismate Mutase Case Study. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2024, 26 , 12467 -12482. 

(21) de Visser, S. P.; Wong, H. P. H.; Zhang, Y.; Yadav, R.; Sastri, C. V. Tutorial Review on 

the Set -Up and Running of Quantum Mechanical Cluster Models for Enzymatic Reaction 

Mechanisms. Chemistry – A European Journal 2024, 30 , e202402468. 

(22) Seritan, S.; Bannwarth, C.; Fales, B. S.; Hohenstein, E. G.; Isborn, C. M.; Kokkila -

Schumacher, S. I. L.; Li, X.; Liu, F.; Luehr, N.; Snyder Jr, J. W.; Song, C.; Titov, A. V.; 

Ufimtsev, I. S.; Wang, L. -P.; Martínez, T. J. TeraChem: A graphical processing unit -

accelerated electronic structure package for large -scale ab initio molecular dynamics. 

WIREs Computational Molecular Science 2021, 11 , e1494. 

(23) Li, R.; Sun, Q.; Zhang, X.; Chan, G. K. -L. Introducing GPU Acceleration into the 

Python -Based Simulations of Chemistry Framework. J. Phys. Chem. A 2025, 129 , 1459 -

1468. 

(24) Kulik, H. J.; Luehr, N.; Ufimtsev, I. S.; Martinez, T. J. Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry for 

Protein Structures. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116 , 12501 -12509. 

(25) Kastner, D.; Leone, L.; Reinhardt, C.; Adamji, H.; Manetsch, M.; Esposito, A.; Nastri, F.; 

Roman -Leshkov, Y.; Lombardi, A.; Kulik, H. Dynamic Charge Distribution as a Key 

Driver of Catalytic Reactivity in an Artificial Metalloenzyme. ChemRxiv 2025 ,

DOI:doi:10.26434/chemrxiv -2024 -xhlgh -v2. 

(26) Li, C.; Chan, G. K. -L. Accurate QM/MM Molecular Dynamics for Periodic Systems in 

GPU4PySCF with Applications to Enzyme Catalysis. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025, 21 ,

803 -816. 38 

(27) Behler, J. Four Generations of High -Dimensional Neural Network Potentials. Chem. Rev. 

2021, 121 , 10037 -10072. 

(28) Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Sauceda, H. E.; Gastegger, M.; Poltavsky, I.; Schütt, K. T.; 

Tkatchenko, A.; Müller, K. -R. Machine Learning Force Fields. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121 ,

10142 -10186. 

(29) Xia, J.; Zhang, Y.; Jiang, B. The evolution of machine learning potentials for molecules, 

reactions and materials. Chemical Society Reviews 2025, 54 , 4790 -4821. 

(30) Manzhos, S.; Carrington, T., Jr. Neural Network Potential Energy Surfaces for Small 

Molecules and Reactions. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121 , 10187 -10217. 

(31) Kim, J.; Cho, H.; Jeon, H.; Jung, J.; Han, S. Reactive Machine Learning Interatomic 

Potentials for Chemistry and Materials Science. Chem. Rev. 2026, 126 , 4467 -4510. 

(32) Yang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Ranasinghe, K. D.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Machine Learning of 

Reactive Potentials. Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 2024, 75 , 371 -395. 

(33) Leimeroth, N.; Erhard, L. C.; Albe, K.; Rohrer, J. Machine -learning interatomic 

potentials from a users perspective: a comparison of accuracy, speed and data efficiency. 

Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2025, 33 , 065012. 

(34) Kalita, B.; Gokcan, H.; Isayev, O. Machine learning interatomic potentials at the 

centennial crossroads of quantum mechanics. Nat Comput Sci 2025, 5, 1120 -1132. 

(35) Eastman, P.; Pretti, E.; Markland, T. E. Accuracy and Efficiency Benchmarks of 

Pretrained Machine Learning Potentials for Molecular Simulations. arXiv.org 2026 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2601.16331. 

(36) Yuan, E. C. Y.; Liu, Y.; Chen, J.; Zhong, P.; Raja, S.; Kreiman, T.; Vargas, S.; Xu, W.; 

Head -Gordon, M.; Yang, C.; Blau, S. M.; Cheng, B.; Krishnapriyan, A.; Head -Gordon, T. 

Foundation models for atomistic simulation of chemistry and materials. Nat Rev Chem 

2026, 10 , 212 -230. 

(37) Anstine, D.; Zubatyuk, R.; Gallegos, L.; Paton, R.; Wiest, O.; Nebgen, B.; Jones, T.; 

Gomes, G.; Tretiak, S.; Isayev, O. Transferable Machine Learning Interatomic Potential 

for Pd -Catalyzed Cross -Coupling Reactions. ChemRxiv 2025 , DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv -

2025 -n36r6. 

(38) Kalikadien, A. V.; Pidko, E. A. Performance of Meta’s Universal Model for Atoms 

across the Conformational and Configurational Space of Diverse Transition -Metal 

Catalysts. J. Phys. Chem. A 2026, 130 , 1897 -1904. 

(39) Quirion, K. P.; Kong, W. -Y.; Stanley, B.; Joy, J.; Ess, D. H. Density Functional Theory 

Surrogate Enables Fast and Broad Computational Evaluation of Homogeneous Transition 

Metal Catalytic Energy Landscapes. ACS Catal. 2026, 16 , 8053 -8066. 

(40) Duignan, T. T. Carbonic anhydrase II simulated with a universal neural network potential. 

arXiv.org 2025 , DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2503.13789. 

(41) Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, Z.; Zhu, R.; Asam, C.; Li, W. -L.; Wang, J. MAPLE: A 

General Framework for Automated Molecular Modeling across Machine -Learning 

Potentials. ChemRxiv 2026 , DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv -2026 -k7znx. 

(42) Thürlemann, M.; Pultar, F.; Gordiy, I.; Ruijsenaars, E.; Riniker, S. AMP -BMS/MM: A 

Multiscale Neural Network Potential for the Fast and Accurate Simulation of Protein 

Dynamics and Enzymatic Reactions. ChemRxiv 2026 .

(43) Świderek, K.; Bertran, J.; Zinovjev, K.; Tuñón, I.; Moliner, V. Advances in the 

Simulations of Enzyme Reactivity in the Dawn of the Artificial Intelligence Age. WIREs 

Computational Molecular Science 2025, 15 , e70003. 39 

(44) Lei, Y. -K.; Yagi, K.; Sugita, Y. Efficient Training of Neural Network Potentials for 

Chemical and Enzymatic Reactions by Continual Learning. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2025, 21 , 2695 -2711. 

(45) Gradisteanu, V.; Chan, E. W.; Hedges, L.; Malagarriga, M.; David, R.; Puente, M. d. l.; 

Laage, D.; Tuñón, I.; Kamp, M. W. v. d.; Zinovjev, K. Simulating enzyme catalysis with 

electrostatically embedded machine learning potentials. Chemical Science 2026, 17 ,

8542 -8556. 

(46) Kozinsky, B.; Musaelian, A.; Johansson, A.; Batzner, S. Scaling the Leading Accuracy of 

Deep Equivariant Models to Biomolecular Simulations of Realistic Size. International 

Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2023; 

p 1 -12. 

(47) Wang, T.; He, X.; Li, M.; Li, Y.; Bi, R.; Wang, Y.; Cheng, C.; Shen, X.; Meng, J.; Zhang, 

H.; Liu, H.; Wang, Z.; Li, S.; Shao, B.; Liu, T. -Y. Ab initio characterization of protein 

molecular dynamics with AI2BMD. Nature 2024, 635 , 1019 -1027. 

(48) Rhodes, B.; Vandenhaute, S.; Šimkus, V.; Gin, J.; Godwin, J.; Duignan, T.; Neumann, M. 

Orb -v3: atomistic simulation at scale. arXiv.org 2025 , DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2504.06231. 

(49) Kovács, D. P.; Moore, J. H.; Browning, N. J.; Batatia, I.; Horton, J. T.; Pu, Y.; Kapil, V.; 

Witt, W. C.; Magdău, I. -B.; Cole, D. J.; Csányi, G. MACE -OFF: Short -Range 

Transferable Machine Learning Force Fields for Organic Molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

2025, 147 , 17598 -17611. 

(50) Kim, J.; You, J.; Park, Y.; Lim, Y.; Kang, Y.; Kim, J.; Jeon, H.; Ju, S.; Hong, D.; Lee, S. 

Y.; Choi, S.; Kim, Y.; Lee, J. W.; Han, S. Optimizing cross -domain transfer for universal 

machine learning interatomic potentials. Nat Commun 2026, 17 , 3432. 

(51) Li, T.; Li, W.; Peng, A.; Xue, J.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, D.; Wang, H. DPA4: Pushing the 

Accuracy -Cost Frontier of Interatomic Potentials with EMFA SO(2) Convolution. 

arXiv.org 2026 , DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2606.02419. 

(52) Schreiner, M.; Bhowmik, A.; Vegge, T.; Busk, J.; Winther, O. Transition1x - a dataset for 

building generalizable reactive machine learning potentials. Sci Data 2022, 9, 779. 

(53) Zhang, S.; Zubatyuk, R.; Yang, Y.; Roitberg, A.; Isayev, O. ANI -1xBB: An ANI -Based 

Reactive Potential for Small Organic Molecules. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025, 21 ,

4365 -4374. 

(54) Levine, D. S.; Shuaibi, M.; Spotte -Smith, E. W. C.; Taylor, M. G.; Hasyim, M. R.; 

Michel, K.; Batatia, I.; Csányi, G.; Dzamba, M.; Eastman, P.; Frey, N. C.; Fu, X.; 

Gharakhanyan, V.; Krishnapriyan, A. S.; Rackers, J. A.; Raja, S.; Rizvi, A.; Rosen, A. S.; 

Ulissi, Z.; Vargas, S.; Zitnick, C. L.; Blau, S. M.; Wood, B. M. The Open Molecules 

2025 (OMol25) Dataset, Evaluations, and Models. arXiv.org 2026 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2505.08762. 

(55) Kulichenko, M.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.; Smith, J. S.; Barros, K.; Allen, A. E. A.; Habib, 

A.; Shinkle, E.; Fedik, N.; Li, Y. W.; Messerly, R. A.; Tretiak, S. Data Generation for 

Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials and Beyond. Chem. Rev. 2024, 124 , 13681 -

13714. 

(56) Herbert, J. M. Dielectric continuum methods for quantum chemistry. WIREs 

Computational Molecular Science 2021, 11 , e1519. 

(57) Banchode, R.; Das, S.; Raghunathan, S.; Ramakrishnan, R. Machine -learned potentials 

for solvation modeling. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2026, 38 , 013002. 40 

(58) Dey, R.; Sharipova, S.; Popov, K. All -atomistic Transferable Neural Potentials for 

Protein Solvation. arXiv.org 2026 , DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2605.14584. 

(59) Garcia -Viloca, M.; Truhlar, D. G.; Gao, J. Importance of Substrate and Cofactor 

Polarization in the Active Site of Dihydrofolate Reductase. Journal of Molecular Biology 

2003, 327 , 549 -560. 

(60) Ufimtsev, I. S.; Luehr, N.; Martinez, T. J. Charge Transfer and Polarization in Solvated 

Proteins from Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 2, 1789 -1793. 

(61) Warshel, A.; Sharma, P. K.; Kato, M.; Xiang, Y.; Liu, H.; Olsson, M. H. M. Electrostatic 

Basis for Enzyme Catalysis. Chem. Rev. 2006, 106 , 3210 -3235. 

(62) Hanoian, P.; Liu, C. T.; Hammes -Schiffer, S.; Benkovic, S. Perspectives on Electrostatics 

and Conformational Motions in Enzyme Catalysis. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48 , 482 -489. 

(63) Ruiz -Pernía, J. J.; Świderek, K.; Bertran, J.; Moliner, V.; Tuñón, I. Electrostatics as a 

Guiding Principle in Understanding and Designing Enzymes. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2024, 20 , 1783 -1795. 

(64) Yang, Z.; Liu, F.; Steeves, A. H.; Kulik, H. J. Quantum Mechanical Description of 

Electrostatics Provides a Unified Picture of Catalytic Action Across Methyltransferases. J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10 , 3779 -3787. 

(65) Chen, D.; Li, Y.; Li, X.; Hong, X.; Fan, X.; Savidge, T. Key difference between 

transition state stabilization and ground state destabilization: increasing atomic charge 

densities before or during enzyme –substrate binding. Chemical Science 2022, 13 , 8193 -

8202. 

(66) Chatterjee, R.; Jindal, G. Orchestrating Metal -Hydride Reactivity in Engineered 

Metalloenzymes: Electronic and Electrostatic Determinants of the Reaction Mechanism. 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2026, 148 , 18383 -18395. 

(67) Kabylda, A.; Frank, J. T.; Suárez -Dou, S.; Khabibrakhmanov, A.; Medrano Sandonas, L.; 

Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Müller, K. -R.; Tkatchenko, A. Molecular Simulations with a 

Pretrained Neural Network and Universal Pairwise Force Fields. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 

147 , 33723 -33734. 

(68) Kalita, B.; Zubatyuk, R.; Anstine, D. M.; Bergeler, M.; Settels, V.; Stork, C.; Spicher, S.; 

Isayev, O. AIMNet2 -NSE: A Transferable Reactive Neural Network Potential for Open -

Shell Chemistry. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2026, 65 , e16763. 

(69) Batatia, I.; Baldwin, W. J.; Kuryla, D.; Hart, J.; Kasoar, E.; Elena, A. M.; Moore, H.; 

Gawkowski, M. J.; Shi, B. X.; Kapil, V.; Kourtis, P.; Magdău, I. -B.; Csányi, G. MACE -

POLAR -1: A Polarisable Electrostatic Foundation Model for Molecular Chemistry. 

arXiv.org 2026 , DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2602.19411. 

(70) Schreiner, M.; Bhowmik, A.; Vegge, T.; Jørgensen, P. B.; Winther, O. NeuralNEB —

neural networks can find reaction paths fast. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2022, 3, 045022. 

(71) Li, B.; Xiao, J.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, J. Z. H.; Zhu, T. Transition State Searching Accelerated 

by Neural Network Potential. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2025, 65 , 2297 -2303. 

(72) Zhao, Q.; Han, Y.; Zhang, D.; Wang, J.; Zhong, P.; Cui, T.; Yin, B.; Cao, Y.; Jia, H.; 

Duan, C. Harnessing Machine Learning to Enhance Transition State Search with 

Interatomic Potentials and Generative Models. Advanced Science 2025, 12 , e06240. 

(73) Anstine, D. M.; Isayev, O. Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials and Long -Range 

Physics. J. Phys. Chem. A 2023, 127 , 2417 -2431. 

(74) Kim, D.; Cheng, B. Long -range electrostatics for machine learning interatomic potentials 

is easier than we thought. J. Chem. Phys. 2026, 164 , 060901. 41 

(75) Grasselli, F.; Rossi, K.; Gironcoli, S. d.; Grisafi, A. Long -range electrostatics in atomistic 

machine learning: a physical perspective. arXiv.org 2026 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2602.11071. 

(76) Cărare, V.; Thiemann, F. L.; Morrow, J. D.; Wales, D. J.; Pyzer -Knapp, E. O.; Dicks, L. 

Global properties of the energy landscape: a testing and training arena for machine 

learned potentials. npj Comput Mater 2025, 12 , 9. 

(77) Fu, C.; Lin, Y.; Krueger, Z.; Yu, W.; Qian, X.; Yoon, B. -J.; Arróyave, R.; Qian, X.; 

Maeda, T.; Nakata, M.; Ji, S. A Benchmark for Quantum Chemistry Relaxations via 

Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials. arXiv.org 2025 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2506.23008. 

(78) Struck, A. -W.; Thompson, M. L.; Wong, L. S.; Micklefield, J. S -Adenosyl -Methionine -

Dependent Methyltransferases: Highly Versatile Enzymes in Biocatalysis, Biosynthesis 

and Other Biotechnological Applications. ChemBioChem 2012, 13 , 2642 -2655. 

(79) Abdelraheem, E.; Thair, B.; Varela, R. F.; Jockmann, E.; Popadić, D.; Hailes, H. C.; 

Ward, J. M.; Iribarren, A. M.; Lewkowicz, E. S.; Andexer, J. N.; Hagedoorn, P. -L.; 

Hanefeld, U. Methyltransferases: Functions and Applications. ChemBioChem 2022, 23 ,

e202200212. 

(80) Lyko, F. The DNA methyltransferase family: a versatile toolkit for epigenetic regulation. 

Nat Rev Genet 2018, 19 , 81 -92. 

(81) Chavous, D. A.; Jackson, F. R.; O'Connor, C. M. Extension of the Drosophila lifespan by 

overexpression of a protein repair methyltransferase. Proceedings of the National 

Academy of Sciences 2001, 98 , 14814 -14818. 

(82) Weinshilboum, R. M.; Otterness, D. M.; Szumlanski, C. L. METHYLATION 

PHARMACOGENETICS: Catechol O -Methyltransferase, Thiopurine Methyltransferase, 

and Histamine N -Methyltransferase. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 

1999, 39 , 19 -52. 

(83) K. Liscombe, D.; V. Louie, G.; P. Noel, J. Architectures, mechanisms and molecular 

evolution of natural product methyltransferases. Natural Product Reports 2012, 29 , 1238 -

1250. 

(84) Martin, J. L.; McMillan, F. M. SAM (dependent) I AM: the S -adenosylmethionine -

dependent methyltransferase fold. Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2002, 12 , 783 -

793. 

(85) Lee, S. G.; Kim, Y.; Alpert, T. D.; Nagata, A.; Jez, J. M. Structure and Reaction 

Mechanism of Phosphoethanolamine Methyltransferase from the Malaria Parasite 

Plasmodium falciparum . Journal of Biological Chemistry 2012, 287 , 1426 -1434. 

(86) Fujishiro, T.; Bai, L.; Xu, T.; Xie, X.; Schick, M.; Kahnt, J.; Rother, M.; Hu, X.; Ermler, 

U.; Shima, S. Identification of HcgC as a SAM -Dependent Pyridinol Methyltransferase in 

[Fe] -Hydrogenase Cofactor Biosynthesis. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 

2016, 55 , 9648 -9651. 

(87) Bai, L.; Wagner, T.; Xu, T.; Hu, X.; Ermler, U.; Shima, S. A Water -Bridged H -Bonding 

Network Contributes to the Catalysis of the SAM -Dependent C -Methyltransferase HcgC. 

Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2017, 56 , 10806 -10809. 

(88) Nicoll, A. J.; Allemann, R. K. Nucleophilic and general acid catalysis at physiological pH 

by a designed miniature esterase. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2004, 2, 2175 -2180. 

(89) Palma, P. N.; Rodrigues, M. L.; Archer, M.; Bonifácio, M. J.; Et, A. Comparative Study 

of ortho - and meta -Nitrated Inhibitors of Catechol -O-methyltransferase: Interactions with 42 

the Active Site and Regioselectivity of O-Methylation. Molecular Pharmacology 2006, 

70 , 143 -153. 

(90) Tsuji, E.; Okazaki, K.; Takeda, K. Crystal structures of rat catechol -O-methyltransferase 

complexed with coumarine -based inhibitor. Biochemical and Biophysical Research 

Communications 2009, 378 , 494 -497. 

(91) Ellermann, M.; Lerner, C.; Burgy, G.; Ehler, A.; Bissantz, C.; Jakob -Roetne, R.; Paulini, 

R.; Allemann, O.; Tissot, H.; Grünstein, D.; Stihle, M.; Diederich, F.; Rudolph, M. G. 

Catechol -O-methyltransferase in complex with substituted 3′ -deoxyribose bisubstrate 

inhibitors. Acta Cryst D 2012, 68 , 253 -260. 

(92) Harrison, S. T.; Poslusney, M. S.; Mulhearn, J. J.; Zhao, Z.; Kett, N. R.; Schubert, J. W.; 

Melamed, J. Y.; Allison, T. J.; Patel, S. B.; Sanders, J. M.; Sharma, S.; Smith, R. F.; Hall, 

D. L.; Robinson, R. G.; Sachs, N. A.; Hutson, P. H.; Wolkenberg, S. E.; Barrow, J. C. 

Synthesis and Evaluation of Heterocyclic Catechol Mimics as Inhibitors of Catechol -O-

methyltransferase (COMT). ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 318 -323. 

(93) Ehler, A.; Lerner, C.; Rudolph, M. G.; RCSB PDB, 2016, DOI:10.2210/pdb5LSA/pdb. 

(94) Iijima, H.; Takebe, K.; Suzuki, M.; Kobayashi, H.; Takamiya, T.; Saito, H.; Niwa, N.; 

Kuwada -Kusunose, T. Crystal Structure of Catechol O -Methyltransferase Complexed 

with Nitecapone. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 2020, 68 , 447 -451. 

(95) Takebe, K.; Suzuki, M.; Kuwada -Kusunose, T.; Shirai, S.; Fukuzawa, K.; Takamiya, T.; 

Uzawa, N.; Iijima, H. Structural and Computational Analyses of the Unique Interactions 

of Opicapone in the Binding Pocket of Catechol O -Methyltransferase: A Crystallographic 

Study and Fragment Molecular Orbital Analyses. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2023, 63 , 4468 -

4476. 

(96) Hjorth Larsen, A.; Jørgen Mortensen, J.; Blomqvist, J.; Castelli, I. E.; Christensen, R.; 

Dułak, M.; Friis, J.; Groves, M. N.; Hammer, B.; Hargus, C.; Hermes, E. D.; Jennings, P. 

C.; Bjerre Jensen, P.; Kermode, J.; Kitchin, J. R.; Leonhard Kolsbjerg, E.; Kubal, J.; 

Kaasbjerg, K.; Lysgaard, S.; Bergmann Maronsson, J.; Maxson, T.; Olsen, T.; Pastewka, 

L.; Peterson, A.; Rostgaard, C.; Schiøtz, J.; Schütt, O.; Strange, M.; Thygesen, K. S.; 

Vegge, T.; Vilhelmsen, L.; Walter, M.; Zeng, Z.; Jacobsen, K. W. The atomic simulation 

environment —a Python library for working with atoms. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2017, 

29 , 273002. 

(97) Bannwarth, C.; Caldeweyher, E.; Ehlert, S.; Hansen, A.; Pracht, P.; Seibert, J.; Spicher, 

S.; Grimme, S. Extended tight -binding quantum chemistry methods. WIREs 

Computational Molecular Science 2021, 11 , e1493. 

(98) Bonomi, M.; Branduardi, D.; Bussi, G.; Camilloni, C.; Provasi, D.; Raiteri, P.; Donadio, 

D.; Marinelli, F.; Pietrucci, F.; Broglia, R. A.; Parrinello, M. PLUMED: A portable 

plugin for free -energy calculations with molecular dynamics. Computer Physics 

Communications 2009, 180 , 1961 -1972. 

(99) Tribello, G. A.; Bonomi, M.; Branduardi, D.; Camilloni, C.; Bussi, G. PLUMED 2: New 

feathers for an old bird. Computer Physics Communications 2014, 185 , 604 -613. 

(100) Grimme, S.; Bannwarth, C.; Shushkov, P. A Robust and Accurate Tight -Binding 

Quantum Chemical Method for Structures, Vibrational Frequencies, and Noncovalent 

Interactions of Large Molecular Systems Parametrized for All spd -Block Elements (Z = 

1–86). J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13 , 1989 -2009. 

(101) Ehlert, S.; Stahn, M.; Spicher, S.; Grimme, S. Robust and Efficient Implicit Solvation 

Model for Fast Semiempirical Methods. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17 , 4250 -4261. 43 

(102) Wood, B. M.; Dzamba, M.; Fu, X.; Gao, M.; Shuaibi, M.; Barroso -Luque, L.; 

Abdelmaqsoud, K.; Gharakhanyan, V.; Kitchin, J. R.; Levine, D. S.; Michel, K.; Sriram, 

A.; Cohen, T.; Das, A.; Rizvi, A.; Sahoo, S. J.; Ulissi, Z. W.; Zitnick, C. L. UMA: A 

Family of Universal Models for Atoms. arXiv.org 2026 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2506.23971. 

(103) Ufimtsev, I. S.; Martínez, T. J. Quantum Chemistry on Graphical Processing Units. 1. 

Strategies for Two -Electron Integral Evaluation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2008, 4, 222 -

231. 

(104) Ufimtsev, I. S.; Martinez, T. J. Quantum Chemistry on Graphical Processing Units. 2. 

Direct Self -Consistent -Field Implementation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2009, 5, 1004 -

1015. 

(105) Ufimtsev, I. S.; Martinez, T. J. Quantum Chemistry on Graphical Processing Units. 3. 

Analytical Energy Gradients, Geometry Optimization, and First Principles Molecular 

Dynamics. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2009, 5, 2619 -2628. 

(106) Hariharan, P. C.; Pople, J. A. The influence of polarization functions on molecular orbital 

hydrogenation energies. Theoret. Chim. Acta 1973, 28 , 213 -222. 

(107) Lee, C.; Yang, W.; Parr, R. G. Development of the Colle -Salvetti correlation -energy 

formula into a functional of the electron density. Phys. Rev. B 1988, 37 , 785 -789. 

(108) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio 

parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT -D) for the 94 elements 

H-Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132 .

(109) Grimme, S.; Ehrlich, S.; Goerigk, L. Effect of the damping function in dispersion 

corrected density functional theory. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2011, 32 , 1456 -

1465. 

(110) York, D. M.; Karplus, M. A Smooth Solvation Potential Based on the Conductor -Like 

Screening Model. J. Phys. Chem. A 1999, 103 , 11060 -11079. 

(111) Lange, A. W.; Herbert, J. M. A smooth, nonsingular, and faithful discretization scheme 

for polarizable continuum models: The switching/Gaussian approach. J. Chem. Phys. 

2010, 133 , 244111. 

(112) Marenich, A. V.; Jerome, S. V.; Cramer, C. J.; Truhlar, D. G. Charge Model 5: An 

Extension of Hirshfeld Population Analysis for the Accurate Description of Molecular 

Interactions in Gaseous and Condensed Phases. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2012, 8, 527 -

541. 

(113) Dodda, L. S.; Vilseck, J. Z.; Tirado -Rives, J.; Jorgensen, W. L. 1.14*CM1A -LBCC: 

Localized Bond -Charge Corrected CM1A Charges for Condensed -Phase Simulations. J. 

Phys. Chem. B 2017, 121 , 3864 -3870. 

(114) Hirshfeld, F. L. Bonded -atom fragments for describing molecular charge densities. 

Theoret. Chim. Acta 1977, 44 , 129 -138. 

(115) Lu, T.; Chen, F. Atomic dipole moment corrected hirshfeld population method. J. Theor. 

Comput. Chem. 2012, 11 , 163 -183. 

(116) Bayly, C. I.; Cieplak, P.; Cornell, W.; Kollman, P. A. A well -behaved electrostatic 

potential based method using charge restraints for deriving atomic charges: the RESP 

model. J. Phys. Chem. 1993, 97 , 10269 -10280. 

(117) Fonseca Guerra, C.; Handgraaf, J. -W.; Baerends, E. J.; Bickelhaupt, F. M. Voronoi 

deformation density (VDD) charges: Assessment of the Mulliken, Bader, Hirshfeld, 44 

Weinhold, and VDD methods for charge analysis. Journal of Computational Chemistry 

2004, 25 , 189 -210. 

(118) Lu, T.; Chen, F. Multiwfn: A multifunctional wavefunction analyzer. Journal of 

Computational Chemistry 2012, 33 , 580 -592. 

(119) Lu, T. A comprehensive electron wavefunction analysis toolbox for chemists, Multiwfn. 

J. Chem. Phys. 2024, 161 , 082503. 

(120) Wang, L. -P.; Song, C. Geometry optimization made simple with translation and rotation 

coordinates. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144 , 214108. 

(121) Liu, D. C.; Nocedal, J. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization. 

Mathematical Programming 1989, 45 , 503 -528. 

(122) Smidstrup, S.; Pedersen, A.; Stokbro, K.; Jónsson, H. Improved initial guess for 

minimum energy path calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 140 , 214106. 

(123) Schmerwitz, Y. L. A.; Ásgeirsson, V.; Jónsson, H. Improved Initialization of Optimal 

Path Calculations Using Sequential Traversal over the Image -Dependent Pair Potential 

Surface. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2024, 20 , 155 -163. 

(124) Henkelman, G.; Uberuaga, B. P.; Jónsson, H. A climbing image nudged elastic band 

method for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113 ,

9901 -9904. 

(125) Neese, F. The ORCA program system. WIREs Computational Molecular Science 2012, 2,

73 -78. 

(126) Neese, F.; Wennmohs, F.; Becker, U.; Riplinger, C. The ORCA quantum chemistry 

program package. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152 , 224108. 

(127) Neese, F. Software Update: The ORCA Program System —Version 6.0. WIREs 

Computational Molecular Science 2025, 15 , e70019. 

(128) Ásgeirsson, V.; Birgisson, B. O.; Bjornsson, R.; Becker, U.; Neese, F.; Riplinger, C.; 

Jónsson, H. Nudged Elastic Band Method for Molecular Reactions Using Energy -

Weighted Springs Combined with Eigenvector Following. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2021, 17 , 4929 -4945. 

(129) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, 

Dipole Moments, and Partial Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15 , 3678 -3693. 

(130) Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Gastegger, M.; Schütt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Müller, K. -R. 

SpookyNet: Learning force fields with electronic degrees of freedom and nonlocal effects. 

Nat Commun 2021, 12 , 7273. 

(131) Batatia, I.; Kovacs, D. P.; Simm, G.; Ortner, C.; Csanyi, G. MACE: Higher Order 

Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, 35 , 11423 -11436. 

(132) Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.; 

Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L.; Desmaison, A.; Kopf, A.; Yang, E.; DeVito, Z.; Raison, M.; 

Tejani, A.; Chilamkurthy, S.; Steiner, B.; Fang, L.; Bai, J.; Chintala, S. PyTorch: An 

Imperative Style, High -Performance Deep Learning Library. Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems 2019, 32 .

(133) Reddi, S. J.; Kale, S.; Kumar, S. On the Convergence of Adam and Beyond. International 

Conference on Learning Representations 2018 .

(134) Prechelt, L. In Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade ; Orr, Genevieve B.;Müller, Klaus -

Robert, Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998, DOI:10.1007/3 -540 -49430 -8_3,55 -69 45 

(135) Morales -Brotons, D.; Vogels, T.; Hendrikx, H. Exponential Moving Average of Weights 

in Deep Learning: Dynamics and Benefits. Transactions on Machine Learning Research 

2023 .

(136) Männistö, P. T.; Kaakkola, S. Catechol -O-methyltransferase (COMT): Biochemistry, 

Molecular Biology, Pharmacology, and Clinical Efficacy of the New Selective COMT 

Inhibitors. Pharmacological Reviews 1999, 51 , 593 -628. 

(137) Izrailev, S.; Stepaniants, S.; Isralewitz, B.; Kosztin, D.; Lu, H.; Molnar, F.; Wriggers, W.; 

Schulten, K. Steered Molecular Dynamics. Computational Molecular Dynamics: 

Challenges, Methods, Ideas: the 2nd International Symposium on Algorithms for 

Macromolecular Modelling 1999 , DOI:10.1007/978 -3-642 -58360 -5_2, 39 -65. 

(138) Bannwarth, C.; Ehlert, S.; Grimme, S. GFN2 -xTB —An Accurate and Broadly 

Parametrized Self -Consistent Tight -Binding Quantum Chemical Method with Multipole 

Electrostatics and Density -Dependent Dispersion Contributions. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2019, 15 , 1652 -1671. 

(139) Pessi, G.; Kociubinski, G.; Mamoun, C. B. A pathway for phosphatidylcholine 

biosynthesis in Plasmodium falciparum involving phosphoethanolamine methylation. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2004, 101 , 6206 -6211. 

(140) Axelrod, J.; Tomchick, R. Enzymatic O -Methylation of Epinephrine and Other Catechols. 

Journal of Biological Chemistry 1958, 233 , 702 -705. 

(141) Batatia, I.; Lin, C.; Hart, J.; Kasoar, E.; Elena, A. M.; Norwood, S. W.; Wolf, T.; Csányi, 

G. Cross Learning between Electronic Structure Theories for Unifying Molecular, 

Surface, and Inorganic Crystal Foundation Force Fields. arXiv.org 2025 ,

DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2510.25380. 

(142) Ohmura, T.; Sato, H.; Terada, T. pdb2reaction: End -to -End Reaction -Path Elucidation 

from PDB Structures Using Machine -Learning Interatomic Potentials. ChemRxiv 2026 ,

DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.15003538/v1. 

For Table of Contents Use Only Page S 1

Supporting Information for 

Enerzyme: A Framework for Efficient Training of Reactive Neural Network Potentials for 

Enzyme Catalysis with Application to Methyltransferases 

Weiliang Luo 1,2 and Heather J. Kulik 1,2, *

> 1

Department of Chemi stry , Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 

> 2

Department of Chemi cal Engineering , Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 

02139, USA 

*corresponding author email: hjkulik@mit.edu 

*email: hjkulik@mit.edu 

Contents 

Table S1. Structural details of the PfPMT QM cluster model. ................................ ................. 2

Table S2. Structural details of the HcgC QM cluster model. ................................ .................... 3

Table S3. QuantumPDB configurations for QM cluster construction of COMT enzymes. ... 4

Table S4. Structural information for QM cluster construction of COMT enzymes. .............. 5

Table S5. xTB and steered MD parameters for reactive sampling. ................................ .......... 6

Table S6. Flexible scan settings in QM clusters. ................................ ................................ ......... 7

Table S7. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -PhysNet. ................................ ................ 8

Table S8. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -SpookyNet. ................................ ............ 8

Table S9. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -MACE. ................................ .................. 9

Table S10. Default Training hyperparameters of Enerzyme -NNPs. ................................ ........ 9

Figure S1. The sampling outcome of reaction coordinates over steered MD trajectories. ... 10 

Figure S2. Triphosphate structures at different levels of theory. ................................ ........... 11 

Figure S3. The modular design of NNPs in Enerzyme. ................................ ............................ 12 

Table S11. Pre -core and Post -core layers in Enerzyme. ................................ .......................... 13 

Figure S4. Automated flexible scan workflow in Enerzymette. ................................ .............. 14 

Figure S5. Automated CI -NEB workflow in Enerzymette. ................................ ..................... 15 

Figure S6. The ORCA -TeraChem and ORCA -Enerzyme interfaces. ................................ .... 16 

Table S12. NEB -Estimated reaction energetics in HcgC and PfPMT cluster models. ......... 16 

Figure S7. Cross -system evaluation of Enerzyme -NNP models on COMTs . ......................... 17 

Table S13. Global geometry accuracy of optimized str uctures from Enerzyme -NNPs. ....... 18 

Figure S8. The failure pattern of Enerzyme -PhysNet in the HcgC cluster NEB. ................. 18 

Figure S9. The failure pattern of Enerzyme -PhysNet in the PfPMT cluster NEB. ............... 19 

Figure S10. Charge -reactivity correlation for more atomic charge schemes. ....................... 20 

Figure S11. Ligand structures and of the 4 out -of -dataset COMT systems ........................... 20 

Table S14. In -/Out -of -dataset errors of Enerzyme -NNPs on COMT systems. ...................... 21 

References ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 22 Page S 2

Table S 1. Structural details of the PfPMT QM cluster model . Th e holo structure of PfPMT used 

in this study is based on its parent PDB entr ies 3UJ7 and 3UJ B with a peer -reviewed publication 1.

The all -atom structure processed from the crystal structure was downloaded from their supporting 

information files of our previous QM/MM stud y on methyltransferases 2, from which the amino 

acid residues and small molecules in the QM region specified in the supporting information were 

extracted as the QM cluster model. C leaved peptide bonds were capped with hydrogen atoms. The 

table lists the three -letter codes of the residues (Res. Name) included in the QM cluster model, 

along with their corresponding residue numbers in the reference full -protein structure (Res. 

Number) and net charges at their determined protonation states. In addition to standard three -letter 

codes, HID means a neutral HIS where a proton resides at the N δ of the side chain, OPE is the 

substrate (2-aminoethyl phosphate ), and SAM is the cofactor (S-adenosylmethionine ). This leads 

to a QM cluster model with 284 atoms after capping and a net charge of −1.

Res. Number Res. Name Net Charge Res. Number Res. Name Net Charge 

8 GLN 0 122 HID 0

9 TYR 0 165 TYR 0

17 TYR 0 169 ARG +1 

54 SER 0 237 LYS +1 

75 ASP −1 257 OPE −2 

101 ILE 0 258 SAM +1 

118 ASP −1 267 WAT 0Page S 3

Table S 2. Structural details of the HcgC QM cluster model . Th e holo structure of HcgC used in 

this study is based on its parent PDB entr ies 5D4U and 5O4J with peer -reviewed publication s3,4 .

The all -atom structure processed from the crystal structure was downloaded from their supporting 

information files of our previous QM/MM stud y on methyltransferases 2, from which the amino 

acid residues and small molecules in the QM region specified in the supporting information were 

extracted as the QM cluster model. C leaved peptide bonds were capped with hydrogen atoms. The 

table lists the three -letter codes of the residues (Res. Name) included in the QM cluster model, 

along with their corresponding residue numbers in the reference full -protein structure (Res. 

Number) and net charges at their determined protonation states. In addition to standard three -letter 

codes, HI E means a neutral HIS where a proton resides at the N ε of the side chain, 9KH is the 

substrate (6-carboxy methyl -4-hydroxy -2-pyridinol ), and SAM is the cofactor (S-

adenosylmethionine ). This leads to a QM cluster model with 545 atoms after capping and a net 

charge of −4.

Res. Number Res. Name Net Charge Res. Number Res. Name Net Charge 

1 SAM +1 208 THR 0

2 9KH −3 209 LEU 0

7 ILE 0 238 GLU −1

8 THR 0 242 PHE 0

10 SER 0 300 WAT 0

58 LYS +1 301 WAT 0

80 TYR 0 304 WAT 0

82 SER 0 308 WAT 0

101 ASP −1 309 WAT 0

102 ILE 0 310 WAT 0

103 GLN 0 312 WAT 0

105 HIE 0 313 WAT 0

120 LEU 0 314 WAT 0

142 THR 0 317 WAT 0

143 GLY 0 318 WAT 0

144 ILE 0 327 WAT 0

145 GLY 0 329 WAT 0

146 GLY 0 330 WAT 0

147 VAL 0 331 WAT 0

148 SER 0 332 WAT 0

163 GLU −1 334 WAT 0

194 THR 0 335 WAT 0

206 THR 0 338 WAT 0

207 MET 0Page S 4

Table S 3. QuantumPDB configurations for QM cluster construction of COMT enzymes. Key -

value pairs in the config.yaml for QuantumPDB that affect the cluster construction result are listed 

in this table. 

Key Value Comment 

modeller true Modeller 5 is used to preprocess the raw protein 

structure fetched from PDB. 

protoss true Protoss 6 server is used to add hydrogens to the 

structure. 

optimize_select_residue 1 Missing residues reported in the raw PDB file are 

built and optimized when Modeller preprocesses 

the raw structure. 

max_clash_refinement_iter 5 The structure will be iteratively refined by 

Modeller and resent to the Protoss server when 

Protoss detects clashes between atoms after 

adding hydrogens until reaching 5 iterations. 

max_atom_count 300 The maximum number of atoms is limited to 300 

before capping the cleaved bonds. 

number_of_spheres 2 The cluster includes at most the second 

coordination sphere of the cen tral residues. 

radius _of_first_sphere 4.0 The first coordination sphere is selected by 

geometric rules. Residues that have atoms within 

4.0 Å of the cent ral residues are included the first 

coordination sphere. 

include_ligands 2 All atoms selected by the cluster construction 

algorithm are included in the cluster, whether they 

are amino acid residues, water molecules, ions, 

other small molecules, or other oligomers. 

capping_method 1 The cleaved bonds in the cluster are capped with 

hydrogen. 

smoothing_method 2 The outer coordination spheres are selected based 

on the Voronoi tessellation of the atomic 

structure. Dummy atoms are filled in the vacuum 

to regularize the shape of the Voronoi cells. 

merge_distance_cutoff 6.0 Two centr al residues matched in the full 

structures are merged into the same center if their 

distance is within 6.0 Å.Page S 5

Table S4. Structural information for QM cluster construction of COMT enzymes. For th ese 

COMT models , we specified the Chemical Component Dictionary (CCD) code of a SAM cofactor ,

a ligand, and a Mg 2+ ion as the centr al residues in the QuantumPDB input to create the QM clusters. 

The CCD code of the ligand for each PDB ID is listed in the table. When multiple sets of centr al 

residues are matched from the full system structure, a cluster around one of them is picked for this 

study, as listed in the table by their chain IDs and residue IDs in the original PDB file. The number 

of atoms in the picked cluster after capping and the total charge of it, as counted by QuantumPDB, 

are also listed. 

PDB ID Ligand Picked Center Residues #Atoms Total Charge 

1V ID DNC A300_A301_A302 318 −1

2CL5 BIE B1216_B1217_B1218 318 −1

2ZVJ KOM A300_A301_A302 303 −1

3S68 TCW A222_A227_A228 303 −1

4XU D 43H A301_A302_A303 320 0

4XUE 43J B301_B302_B303 310 0

5LSA DNC A301_A303_A304 310 −1

6LFE EAO A301_A302_A303 301 −1

7XJB DNI C301_C302_C303 313 −1Page S 6

Table S5. xTB and steered MD parameters for reactive sampling. 

Parameter Value Comment 

Solvent THF ALPB implicit solvation in the xTB package. This 

solvent is chosen because it has a similar 

dielectric constant to the one used in the reference 

DFT calculations. 

Thermostat Langevin ASE implementation 

Time step 0.5 fs For the Langevin thermostat. 

Friction coefficient 0.01 fs −1 For the Langevin thermostat. 

Temperature 1000 K/500 

K

For the Langevin thermostat. 1000 K is only for 

the PfPMT cluster. 500 K is for other clusters due 

to their larger size and more molecular fragments 

in the cluster. 

Preparation time 0.5 ps 

Production time 12.5 ps 

Restraint κ 0.05 

hartree/ Å2

The spring constant of the Hookean restraint 

potential applied to all pairs between C α of amino 

acid residues, water oxygens, and Mg 2+ .

Bias potential κ0 1000 

kcal/mol/ Å2

The spring constant of the 

MOVINGRESTRAINT harmonic potential in 

PLUMED. 

Initial CV value −2 Å During the preparation run, the center of the bias 

potential moves from the CV value of the input 

structure to this value. 

Final CV value 2 Å During the production run, the center of the bias 

potential moves from the CV from the initial 

value to the final value. 

Sampling interval 10 fs Snapshots are only sampled during the production 

run. Page S 7

Table S6. Flexible scan settings in QM clusters. All scans are set between the CE atom of the 

unique SAM (residue ID: SAM) in the cluster and a nucleophilic atom (atom ID listed in the table) 

of the unique substrate (residue ID listed in the table). The target dista nces between the scanned 

atoms are also listed. 

System Substrate Res idue ID Nucleophilic Atom ID Target Distance (Å) 

PfPMT OPE N 1.492 

HcgC 9KH C5 1.500 

COMT -2ZVJ KOM O9 1.430 

COMT -4XUD 43H O 1.430 

COMT -4XUE 43J O 1.430 

COMT -6LFE EAO O19 1.430 

COMT -7XJB DNI O24 1.430 

COMT -1VID DNC O2 1.430 

COMT -2CL5 BIE O2 1.430 

COMT -3S68 TCW O8 1.430 

COMT -5LSA DNC O2 1.430 Page S 8

Table S 7. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -PhysNet. Our Enerzyme -PhysNet core is a 

reimplementation in PyTorch of the original TensorFlow version in the official PhysNet GitHub 

repository 11 . We used Distance, Range Separation, Exponential Gaussian RBF , and Random atom 

embedding pre -core layers, and Readout, Atomic Affine, Charge conservation, Electrostatic 

energy (PhysNet flavor), Atomic charge to dipole, Energy reduce, and Force post -core layers 

(Table S 11 ). We adopted the recommended model depth and width of the PhysNet and SpookyNet 

in their original literature .

Key Value 

Short -range cutoff radius 10 Å 

Long -range cutoff radius +∞ 

Dimension of the atom type embedding 128 

Number of radial basis functions 64 

Number of interaction blocks 5

Number of residual layers for the atomic embedding preprocessing 2

Number of residual layers in the interaction block 3

Number of residual layers in the output block 1

Table S8. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -SpookyNet. Our Enerzyme -SpookyNet core 

customized the neural network layer initialization of the official SpookyNet GitHub repository 12 

for better training dynamics. We used Distance, Range Separation, Exponential Bernstein RBF ,

Nuclear embedding, and Electronic embedding pre -core layers, and Readout, Atomic Affine, 

Charge conservation, Electrostatic energy (SpookyNet flavor), Atomic charge to dipole, Energy 

reduce, and Force post -core layers (Table S 11 ). We adopted the recommended model depth and 

width of the PhysNet and SpookyNet in their original literature .

Key Value 

Short -range cutoff radius 5 Bohr 

Long -range cutoff radius +∞ 

Dimension of the atom type embedding 128 

Number of radial basis functions 16 

Number of interaction blocks 6

Number of residual layers for the atomic embedding preprocessing 1

Number of residual layers in the interaction block 1

Number of residual layers for the atomic feature postprocessing 1

Number of residual layers in the output block 1Page S 9

Table S9. Architectural configurations of Enerzyme -MACE. Our Enerzyme -MACE core borrows 

the official MACE GitHub repository 13 and chooses the MACE -OFF -M architecture 14 . We used 

Distance, Range Separation, Exponential Bernstein RBF , Nuclear embedding, and Electronic 

embedding pre -core layers, and Readout, Atomic Affine, Charge conservation, Electrostatic 

energy (PhysNet flavor), Atomic charge to dipole, Energy reduce, and Force post -core layers 

(Table S 11 ). 

Key Value 

Short -range cutoff radius 5 Å 

Long -range cutoff radius +∞ 

Dimension of the atom type embedding 128 

Number of radial basis functions 8

Number of interaction blocks 2

Maximum angular momentum 3

Maximum order of correlation 3

Dimension of additional hidden irreps 128×1o 

Dimension of radial MLP [64, 64, 64] 

Dimension of MLP irreps 16×0e 

Gate activation function silu 

Averaged number of neighbors 23.33 

Table S 10 . Default Training hyperparameters of Enerzyme -NNPs. 

Hyperparameter Description Hyperparameter Value 

PhysNet SpookyNet MACE 

Learning rate 0.001 0.001 0.01 /0.001 

Weight decay 0 0 0

Adam optimizer’s beta (0.9, 0.999) (0.9, 0.999) (0.9, 0.999) 

Adam optimizer’s eps 10 −6 10 −6 10 −6

Batch size 8 8 10 

Maximum epochs 10000 10000 10000 

Early stopping patience 200 200 200 

Warm -up epochs 10 10 10 

EMA decay rate 0.999 0.999 0.999 

Floating point data type FP32 FP32 FP32 

Energy weight 𝑤 𝐸 1 1 1

Forces weight 𝑤 𝑭 1000 1000 √3 1000 

Dipole moment weight 𝑤 𝝁 1 1 1

Total charge weight 𝑤 𝑄 1 1 1

Atomic charges weight 𝑤 𝑞 100 100 100 

Loss type ℓ𝑥 MAE RMSE MAE 

Metric type 𝑚 𝑥 RMSE RMSE RMSE Page S 10 

Figure S1 . The sampling outcome of reaction coordinates over steered MD trajectories. The left 

column is the time evolution of reaction coordinates throughout the 12.5 ps steered MD production 

run. The distances dCX and dSC are defined in Figure 3 in the main text. The right column contains 

histograms of the dCX –dSC value over the 1,250 snapshots used as NNP datasets. For the 5 COMT 

systems, their structure sources are annotated with their PDB IDs. Page S 11 

Figure S2. Triphosphate structures at different levels of theory. Left: This snapshot shows a 

common pattern of unphysical triphosphate structures encountered in steered MD driven at the 

GFN1 -xTB level of theory. In this 301 -atom cluster extracted from the SARS -CoV -2 nsp16 -nsp10 

2' -O-methyltransferase structure (PDB ID: 6WVN ) around its substrate analog 7-methyl -GpppA 

(CCD code: GTA) and SAM (A7112_A7113) by the standard QuantumPDB procedure used for 

COMTs in this study, starting from atomic positions in the crystal structure, the triphosphate group 

tends to manifest unphysically large P–O–P bond angles during the standard steered MD 

production run at 500 K used for all other clusters in this study. Right: The histograms of the 

triphosphate P –O–P bond angles over the sta ndard steered MD production runs of the 6WVN 

cluster driven by GFN1 -xTB semi -empirical quantum chemistry and UMA -s-1.1 universal NNP, 

respectively. A histogram from a 25 -step flexible scan between the carbon of the transferring 

methyl group and the 2 ’ oxygen of the GTA (O2B) from the optimized distance of the crystal 

structure to 1.48 Å, at the standard DFT level of theory used for all other clusters in this study, is 

also included as a reference. Page S 12 

Figure S3. The modular design of NNPs in Enerzyme. In Enerzyme, every NNP is disassembled 

into sequential neural network layers. The FF Builder in Enerzyme initializes those layers 

sequentially and load s each layer's shared and specific parameters from a YAML configuration 

file to build a fully assembled NNP. Information flow across layers is organized as a dictionary of 

fields that store different features, predictions, or intermediate variables of the molecule. Each 

layer of the NNP runs the calculation for its own output fields only with its designated input fields 

from the previous layer's outputs and directly passes other fields forward. Th ese data -passing 

logistics are encapsulated within the BaseFFLayer abstract class, and its subclass layers only 

implement the algorithmic part. Page S 13 

Table S11. Pre -core and Post -core layers in Enerzyme. 

Layer Type Functionality 

Distance Pre -core Compute distances and translation vectors for all 

edges in the molecular graph. 

Range separation Pre -core Separate short -range edges with a distance larger than 

a given cutoff, and those with a distance no larger than 

the cutoff, into different fields. 

Exponential Gaussian RBF Pre -core Compute the exponential Gaussian radial basis 

function (RBF) used in the original PhysNet 7 from the 

distances for all short -range edges in the molecular 

graph. 

Exponential Bernstein RBF Pre -core Compute the exponential Bernstein polynomial RBF 

used in the original SpookyNet 8 from the distances for 

all short -range edges in the molecular graph. 

Bessel RBF Pre -core Compute the exponential Bessel function RBF used in 

the original MACE 9 from the distances for all short -

range edges in the molecular graph. 

Random atom embedding Pre -core Embed atom types into learnable random vectors used 

in the original PhysNet 7.

Nuclear embedding Pre -core Embed atom types into learnable random vectors 

fused with a learnable transformation on ground -state 

electronic configuration features of the atom type, 

introduced in SpookyNet 8.

Electronic embedding Pre -core Embed the total charge or the total spin multiplicity of 

the system into learnable vectors for each atom ,

introduced in SpookyNet 8.

Gather atom embedding Pre -core Gather all atom embedding vectors with a summation 

that obtains the embeddings ready to be passed into the 

message passing core. 

Readout Post -core Read out atomic properties like energies or charges by 

applying NN block to the atom features from the 

message passing core 

Atomic affine Post -core Do element -wise , learnable shift and scale on atomic 

properties, used in the original PhysNet 7 and 

SpookyNet 8.

Charge conservation Post -core Correct the predicted atomic charges with the input 

total charge by a linear transformation, used in the 

original PhysNet 7 and SpookyNet 8.

Electrostatic energy Post -core Compute the Coulomb potential based on the system 

geometry and predicted atomic charges, with different 

damping flavors in the original PhysNet 7 and 

SpookyNet 8.

Atomic charge to dipole Post -core Compute the system dipole moment based on the 

system geometry and predicted atomic charges. 

Energy reduce Post -core Reduce the atomic energies to the total energy of the 

system 

Force Post -core Compute the forces on each atom through auto -

differentiation of the total energy with respect to the 

coordinates. Page S 14 

Figure S 4. Automated flexible scan workflow in Enerzymette . This flowchart shows the iterative 

NEB algorithm in the Enerzymette enerzyme_ scan submodule. The highest -energy structure of 

the output transition path is treated as the estimated transition state (TS) . All optimized reactants 

and products, including the original endpoints and the newly discovered intermediates, are also 

collected. Page S 15 

Figure S 5. Automated CI -NEB workflow in Enerzymette . This flowchart shows the iterative NEB 

algorithm in the Enerzymette enerzyme_neb submodule. The output climbing image (CI) is 

treated as the estimated transition state (TS) . All optimized reactants and products, including the 

original endpoints and the newly discovered intermediates, are also collected. IDPP stands for 

image dependent pair potential, an interpolation scheme, and MEP stands for minimum energy 

pathway. Page S 16 

Figure S6. The ORCA -TeraChem and ORCA -Enerzyme interfaces. These flowcharts show how 

ORCA, as an external optimizer, interfaces with TeraChem via the Enerzymette 

orca_terachem_request submodule or with Enerzyme via its server -client mode. 

Table S 12 . NEB -Estimated reaction energetics in HcgC and PfPMT cluster models. ΔE is the 

estimated reaction energy change, and Δ E‡ is the estimated reaction kinetic barrier. 

System Method Δ

E (kcal/mol) Δ

E‡ (kcal/mol) 

HcgC Reference DFT -18.1 20.7 

Enerzyme -SpookyNet -17.7 18.3 

Enerzyme -MACE -11.8 17.1 

PfPMT Reference DFT -9.7 23.1 

Enerzyme -SpookyNet -7.8 22.8 

Enerzyme -MACE -11.1 26.2 Page S 17 

Figure S7. The error of the energy span (kinetic barrier) and reaction energy change error from 

iterative scan simulations when the Enerzyme -NNP model s are trained on a COMT cluster of the 

training PDB ID and evaluated on a COMT cluster of the simulation PDB ID. Page S 18 

Table S13. Global geometry accuracy of Enerzyme -NNPs on reactants, products and TS from 

NEB in cluster models . The RMSD is the root mean square deviation of all unconstrained atoms 

between NNP - and DFT - optimized substructures.                      

> System Method Reactant RMSD (Å)Product RMSD (Å)TS RMSD (Å)
> HcgC Enerzyme -SpookyNet 0.21 0.18 0.19
> Enerzyme -MACE 0.41 0.11 0.40
> PfPMT Enerzyme -SpookyNet 0.46 0.58 0.48
> Enerzyme -MACE 0.46 0.28 0.40

Figure S8. The failure pattern of Enerzyme -PhysNet in the HcgC cluster NEB. Left: Single -point 

energy evaluation of Enerzyme -SpookyNet and Enerzyme -PhysNet along DFT flexible scan 

trajectories in the HcgC cluster model. The initial energies of different energy curves are aligned 

to be the same . Right: the distorted TS structure estimated by the iterative NEB with Enerzyme -

PhysNet with a too -small bond angle and a too -large dCX as defined in Figure 3 in the main text. 

Color scheme: carbon in gray, hydrogen in white, oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, and sulfur in 

yellow. Page S 19 

Figure S9. The failure pattern of Enerzyme -PhysNet in the PfPMT cluster NEB. Left: Energy 

profile of the flexible scan of the PfPMT cluster model with Enerzyme -PhysNet. The initial 

energies of different energy curves are aligned to be the same . Right: the distorted TS structure 

estimated by the iterative NEB with Enerzyme -PhysNet with a too -small bond angle and a too -

large dCX as defined in Figure 3 in the main text. Color scheme: carbon in gray, hydrogen in white, 

oxygen in red, nitrogen in blue, and sulfur in yellow. Page S 20 

Figure S 10 . Charge -reactivity correlation for more atomic charge schemes. The correlation 

between the partial charge of the nucleophilic atom of COMT substrates and the reaction barrier 

and the reaction energy change. For all systems from 5 PDB IDs (Scheme 1 in the main text ), their 

reaction barriers and atomic charges obtained from reference DFT flexible scan with electronic 

structure analysis and Enerzyme NNP flexible scan with atomic charge prediction are plotted at 

the top left. Left: The lines show the linear regression between the predicted reaction barrier of the 

5 systems and the predicted nucleophilic atom charge with their corresponding markers for 

different PDB IDs . 1.2xCM5 and RESP overlap for one point, as indicated by inset labels, and the 

remaining charge schemes are colored according to the legend shown at top. Right: The Pearson 

R coefficients for the linear regression between the predicted reaction barrier/reaction energy 

change for the 5 systems and the predicted nucleophilic atom charge across different charge 

schemes. 

Figure S11. Ligand structures and their associated PDB IDs for the protein -ligand complex crystal 

structures of the 4 out -of -dataset COMT systems used in the Enerzyme -NNP cross -system 

evaluations . The nucleophilic atoms in the methyl transfer reactions are colored. Page S 21 

Table S 14 . Mean absolute error (MAE) of reaction barriers obtained by flexible scan with 

Enerzyme -NNPs trained on COMT datasets compared to reference DFT results . Data ratio 1 ×

stands for 175 datapoints per system for 5 COMT systems in the dataset. In -dataset metrics are 

evaluated on the 5 COMT systems in the dataset (Scheme 1 in the main text ), while out -of -dataset 

metrics are evaluated on other 4 COMT systems in the dataset (Figure S11).                    

> Data ratio Method In -dataset MAE (kcal/mol) Out -of -dataset MAE (kcal/mol)
> 1×Enerzyme -SpookyNet 3.24 3.22
> Enerzyme -MACE 2.18 1.99
> 2×Enerzyme -SpookyNet 2.08 2.3 1
> Enerzyme -MACE 1.79 1.79
> 4×Enerzyme -SpookyNet 1.7 41.72
> Enerzyme -MACE 1.32 1.98

Page S 22 

References 

(1) Lee, S. G.; Kim, Y.; Alpert, T. D.; Nagata, A.; Jez, J. M. Structure and Reaction Mechanism 

of Phosphoethanolamine Methyltransferase from the Malaria Parasite Plasmodium 

Falciparum: AN ANTIPARASITIC DRUG TARGET * ♦. J. Biol. Chem. 2012 , 287 (2), 1426 –

1434. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.315267. 

(2) Yang, Z.; Liu, F.; Steeves, A. H.; Kulik, H. J. Quantum Mechanical Description of 

Electrostatics Provides a Unified Picture of Catalytic Action Across Methyltransferases. J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019 , 10 (13), 3779 –3787. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b01555. 

(3) Fujishiro, T.; Bai, L.; Xu, T.; Xie, X.; Schick, M.; Kahnt, J.; Rother, M.; Hu, X.; Ermler, U.; 

Shima, S. Identification of HcgC as a SAM -Dependent Pyridinol Methyltransferase in [Fe] -

Hydrogenase Cofactor Biosynthesis. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016 , 55 (33), 9648 –9651. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201604352. 

(4) Bai, L.; Wagner, T.; Xu, T.; Hu, X.; Ermler, U.; Shima, S. A Water -Bridged H -Bonding 

Network Contributes to the Catalysis of the SAM -Dependent C -Methyltransferase HcgC. 

Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017 , 56 (36), 10806 –10809. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201705605. 

(5) Webb, B.; Sali, A. Comparative Protein Structure Modeling Using MODELLER. Curr. 

Protoc. Bioinforma. 2016 , 54 (1), 5.6.1 -5.6.37. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.3. 

(6) Bietz, S.; Urbaczek, S.; Schulz, B.; Rarey, M. Protoss: A Holistic Approach to Predict 

Tautomers and Protonation States in Protein -Ligand Complexes. J. Cheminformatics 2014 , 6

(1), 12. https://doi.org/10.1186/1758 -2946 -6-12. 

(7) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, Dipole 

Moments, and Partial Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019 , 15 (6), 3678 –3693. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00181. 

(8) Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Gastegger, M.; Schütt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Müller, K. -R. 

SpookyNet: Learning Force Fields with Electronic Degrees of Freedom and Nonlocal Effects. 

Nat. Commun. 2021 , 12 (1), 7273. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -021 -27504 -0. 

(9) Batatia, I.; Kovacs, D. P.; Simm, G.; Ortner, C.; Csanyi, G. MACE: Higher Order Equivariant 

Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. Adv. Neural Inf. 

Process. Syst. 2022 , 35 , 11423 –11436. 

(10) Paszke, A.; Gross, S.; Massa, F.; Lerer, A.; Bradbury, J.; Chanan, G.; Killeen, T.; Lin, Z.; 

Gimelshein, N.; Antiga, L.; Desmaison, A.; Kopf, A.; Yang, E.; DeVito, Z.; Raison, M.; 

Tejani, A.; Chilamkurthy, S.; Steiner, B.; Fang, L.; Bai, J.; Chintala, S. P yTorch: An 

Imperative Style, High -Performance Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems ; Curran Associates, Inc., 2019; Vol. 32. 

(11) MMunibas/PhysNet, 2025. https://github.com/MMunibas/PhysNet (accessed 2025 -12 -

04). 

(12) Unke, O. OUnke/SpookyNet, 2025. https://github.com/OUnke/SpookyNet (accessed 

2025 -12 -05). 

(13) ACEsuit/Mace, 2025. https://github.com/ACEsuit/mace (accessed 2025 -12 -05). 

(14) Kovács, D. P.; Moore, J. H.; Browning, N. J.; Batatia, I.; Horton, J. T.; Pu, Y.; Kapil, V.; 

Witt, W. C.; Magdău, I. -B.; Cole, D. J.; Csányi, G. MACE -OFF: Short -Range Transferable 

Machine Learning Force Fields for Organic Molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025 , 147 (21), 

17598 –17611. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.4c07099.