Title: Data-driven atomistic modelling of hybrid halide perovskite passivation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.05321v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 03:39:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
# Data-driven atomistic modelling of hybrid halide perovskite passivation 

## Laura-Bianca Pas ¸ca 1, Henry J. Snaith 2, and Volker L. Deringer *1 

> 1

Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 

> 2

Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 

Molecular passivation of surface defects is key to improving the optoelectronic perfor-mance of hybrid halide perovskite materials, but the underlying atomistic mechanisms are incompletely understood. While machine-learned interatomic potentials are now widely used to simulate complex molecular and crystalline systems, their application to experimentally-realistic scenarios – such as molecules coordinating to perovskite sur-faces – is still far from trivial. Here, we describe a multistep training pipeline, re-sembling continuous fine-tuning used for large language models, to underpin atomistic modelling and computational experiments in this domain. Our protocol involves two components: (i) a large, curated, and open dataset of diverse metal and hybrid halide perovskite structures (‘hyP-26’); and (ii) a small, specialised dataset for an amino-silane molecule passivating the surface, providing highly specific information for fine-tuning. We apply this approach to explore collective behaviour at a mixed-composition halide perovskite surface passivated with a varying coverage of amino-silane molecules, re-vealing an evolution of interactions with increasing molecular surface coverage.  

> *E-mail: volker.deringer@chem.ox.ac.uk

1

> arXiv:2607.05321v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 6 Jul 2026

# Introduction 

Hybrid perovskite materials are at the forefront of emerging solar-cell research. Despite their favourable optoelectronic properties, a well-known challenge is their decomposition under humidity, heat, prolonged illumination, electrical bias, and especially combinations of these conditions. 1 To improve operational durability, a central experimental strategy for reduc-ing ion migration and degradation is through molecular passivation of interfaces, whereby passivating molecules bind to surface defects. 2 Amino-silanes have proven effective in this role, 3 with (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane (AEAPTMS) in particular having been shown to improve the optoelectronic properties of perovskite films following surface treatment, and considerable improvement in long-term stability. 4

From a computational chemistry perspective, molecular passivation presents a substantial challenge: it requires the modelling of bulk disorder, surface reconstructions, and chemically distinct adsorbates, using large simulation cells to capture the full range of relevant structures. Large-scale simulations are now routinely accessible in principle using machine-learned in-teratomic potentials (MLIPs); 5,6 an overview of MLIPs for hybrid halide perovskites is given in Ref. 7. Fine-tuning a general-purpose pre-trained or ‘foundational’ model (FM) on a small, representative dataset can yield an accurate system-specific potential at a fraction of the cost of directly training a material-specific MLIP. 8–11 Despite their broad success, current FMs struggle in chemically heterogeneous, disordered, or interfacial environments 12,13 – precisely the type of conditions encountered in molecular passivation of (poly)crystalline surfaces. To deal with this challenge, bespoke datasets and training approaches have been explored: for example, for heterogeneous catalysis applications, 14 and indeed recently for halide per-ovskites. 15 Material-specific datasets can supply the structural motifs that are sparsely repre-sented in large pre-training datasets, such as specific surface terminations or defect configu-rations of interest. In large language model (LLM) research, the continual training of models through a proto-col called continual fine-tuning (CFT) has been proposed for adapting to ever-expanding and 2evolving datasets without retraining the model from scratch. 16–18 Similarly, constructing ML models with varying levels of specialisation for a target task can be achieved through a CFT-inspired approach. Such strategies have already been explored for chemistry applications in the development of an LLM specialised in materials research tasks; 19 for training MLIPs, the concept of ‘lifelong learning’ protocols for integrating new data has been explored for chemical reaction networks. 20 Strategies for preventing ‘catastrophic forgetting’, the loss of knowledge gained in previous stages of training, have recently been proposed for continual learning in MLIPs, 21,22 and repeated, iterative fine-tuning has been studied. 23 However, ques-tions remain: is there a role for wider-ranging, yet material-specific datasets in fine-tuning protocols, whereby combining datasets with different levels of specialisation can lead to im-proved performance on the target system for MLIP modelling? And would such an approach still be required as the size and diversity of pre-training datasets increases, up to a point where ‘zero-shot’ performance already approaches a plateau for general applications? Herein, we describe a machine-learning-based modelling framework that embeds material-specific datasets within a fine-tuning protocol for modelling complex, application-driven sys-tems – here, hybrid perovskites. Our approach has two stages: (i) the construction of a diverse, curated dataset (which we call ‘hyP-26’), containing representative metal and mixed-composition (mixed cation and halide) hybrid perovskite structures, including various disor-dered phases; and (ii) the application of ‘hyP-26’ in a CFT-like training approach to produce an MLIP specialised for AEAPTMS passivation at a mixed hybrid perovskite surface. We demonstrate how this protocol can be applied to simulate the binding modes of AEAPTMS molecules with varying surface coverages. Our simulations allow us to model the collec-tive, dynamic behaviour of multiple amino-silane molecules binding to and disrupting the crystalline hybrid perovskite lattice. More generally, we provide a blueprint for ML-driven simulations of complex, experimentally relevant systems. 3A dataset for modelling hybrid perovskite passivation 

Many large, open datasets of chemical structures are now available and used to pre-train MLIPs for general chemistry applications. 24–28 Starting from such pre-trained FMs based on the MACE architecture, 29 we employed different fitting approaches to systematically study the role of the datasets used at each stage of the fine-tuning protocol (the latter being described in detail in Supplementary Note 1). A schematic illustration of the three main protocols is shown in Fig. 1a. We denote the extensive pre-training dataset D0 in this scheme. For simulating known materials that are well-represented in D0 , pre-trained MLIPs can sometimes be used out-of-the-box (‘zero-shot’), without further fine-tuning. For more complex systems or target properties, a small subset of specialised data, denoted here as D2 , is now predominantly used to fine-tune the FM (‘FM →D2 ’; dark blue in Fig. 1a). This approach replaces the use of a curated, material-specific dataset, D1 , which would previously have been laboriously assembled and used to train an MLIP from scratch. Herein, we also explore a stepwise strategy: to first adapt the FM to the intermediate dataset D1 , and then subsequently fine-tune it on D2 in a CFT-like scheme (‘FM →D1 →D2 ’; orange in Fig. 1a). As a point of reference, we furthermore fit a model from scratch, directly for the domain of interest (that is, on both D1 and D2 ). We stress that our study focuses on the model’s performance on the specialised application targeted by D2 , rather than aiming to preserve the same level of performance on the more gen-eral application represented by D1 . For such a use case, ‘naive’ fine-tuning, as also employed in the present work, has been found to perform well without requiring multi-head replay or other strategies for retaining generalisability beyond the target application. 11 Our work now interrogates whether the CFT loop adds any benefit compared to direct FT practices in the limit of pre-training datasets with extensive coverage of the relevant configurational space. To investigate the effect of the general pre-training dataset, D0 , we applied the training proto-col to different MACE-based FMs. Specifically, we considered MACE-MP-0b3 ,9 pre-trained 4Figure 1: Fine-tuning pipelines for ML-driven simulations of hybrid perovskite passivation . ( a)Schematic showing the different fine-tuning protocols compared in the present work: the zero-shot foundation model (‘FM’), the fine-tuned model (‘FM →D2 ’), and the continuously fine-tuned model (‘FM →D1 →D2 ’). ( b) The composition of the ‘hyP-26’ dataset, here used as the material-specific dataset, D1 . The two-dimensional representation of the configurational space is constructed with the UMAP algorithm 30 based on the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP) similarity metric, 31 

showing the clustering of structurally-similar systems included in the dataset. ( c) The composition of the specialised dataset, D2 , focused on hybrid perovskite surface passivation with AEAPTMS. Structural sketches show the main coordination types studied (denoted, from left to right: ‘N1/N2/O’, ‘N2/O’, ‘N1’, and ‘O vertical’). 

on the MPTrj dataset, 25 and MACE-MH-1 ,32 trained using a multi-head fine-tuning strategy on a pre-training dataset with a much more diverse configurational space. Two additional mod-els, MACE-MPA-0 and MACE-OMAT-0 , are discussed in the Supplementary Information. The MPTrj dataset consists of ≈ 1.6M structures sampled from relaxation trajectories of Materials Project entries. 25 While this dataset has been extensively used for pre-training MLIPs, its construction emphasises near-equilibrium inorganic crystalline configurations and includes a small fraction of organic environments (with only 1.8% of the dataset composi-tion consisting of organic molecular crystals 33 ). As a result, it underrepresents chemical 5environments relevant to heterogeneous or molecular–inorganic systems, such as those con-sidered here. By contrast, the datasets underlying MACE-MH-1 32 cover a broader configura-tional space, including inorganic crystals, surface structures, organic molecules and reactive organic systems, 24,26–28,50 and it has been shown to achieve an improved out-of-the-box per-formance on these systems compared to models pre-trained on datasets with a smaller con-figurational coverage. 32 The surface systems and organic molecules each comprise between 10–15% of the dataset used in the multi-head fine-tuning stage of the FM generation pro-tocol. 32 A previous study proposed a framework for combining the fine-tuning MACE-MH-1 

with delta-learning for predicting kinetic and thermochemical parameters of reactions in het-erogeneous catalysis, 34 another domain requiring accurate modelling of surfaces, and both organic and inorganic chemical components. By comparing the FMs pre-trained on these two datasets within the same CFT-like frame-work, we assess how the degree of coverage of D0 influences the effectiveness of subsequent fine-tuning. In particular, this allows us to contrast the case when D0 underrepresents the chemical domain of interest with that in which the pre-training data already covers a highly-diverse chemical space, providing insight into when CFT on the domain-specific dataset D1 

offers tangible advantages over conventional fine-tuning strategies. To this end, we constructed a general hybrid perovskite-specific dataset, introduced here as ‘hyP-26’, which represents the D1 training data required for the fitting protocol. As illustrated in Fig. 1b, ‘hyP-26’ contains mixed-composition hybrid perovskite structures, the binary crystalline phases of the lead halides (PbX 2), higher-temperature molecular dynamics (MD) structures, defect and surface systems, as well as random structures, with the aim of covering chemical environments possibly present in disordered phases or interfacial systems. We show the distribution of the structures in a two-dimensional representation of the SOAP similarity metric, as a per-structure average: 31 this means that related structures will cluster together in the colour-coded map. The same representation colour-coded with respect to the cohesive energy of each structure is shown in Fig. S1. The generation of the dataset is described in detail in Supplementary Note 2 and presented in Tables S1–S4. 6The specific dataset D2 , illustrated in Fig. 1c, corresponding to the downstream task of mod-elling hybrid perovskite surface passivation, was generated using a combination of iterative MD training and sampling of relaxation trajectories (Supplementary Note 2). The passi-vating molecule considered here is AEAPTMS, which has been reported as an effective amino-silane passivator for hybrid perovskite surfaces. 3 Most studies of amino-silane pas-sivation were conducted on a mixed hybrid perovskite composition 3,35 investigated for its use in the production of tandem solar cells; 36 we therefore employed a similar composi-tion of Cs 0.12 FA 0.88 PbI 0.75 Br 0.25 . Starting with an AEAPTMS molecule placed on different sites at the surface, the system is relaxed into four representative coordination environments, illustrated in Fig. 1c: bidentate coordination involving two nitrogen atoms and an oxygen atom binding to neighbouring Pb sites (‘N1/N2/O’); nitrogen–oxygen coordination at neigh-bouring Pb sites (‘N2/O’); monodentate coordination via the first nitrogen atom (‘N1’); and vertical coordination through oxygen atoms (‘O vertical’). We assume that the multidentate binding configurations are favourable for stable passivation since the molecules are less likely to entirely desorb from the surface over time. We found that including snapshots from relaxation trajectories in the training dataset was nec-essary for the MACE-MP-0b3 -derived models’ ability to identify the ‘N1/N2/O’ configuration type during MLIP-driven MD or structural relaxations (discussed below). The ’direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’ and MACE-MH-1 -derived models are able to identify this binding mode with-out its explicit inclusion in the training dataset; a comparison of the models’ performance in predicting the single-point energies of the different configuration types before and after the inclusion of the relaxation trajectory snapshots is provided in Fig. S2: the MACE-MP-0b3 -derived models overpredict the energies by over 10 meV/atom without the inclusion of the re-laxation snapshots, whereas the MACE-MH-1 -based models already show a sub-10 meV/atom energy prediction compared to DFT without the explicit inclusion of the relaxed configuration types. Our D2 dataset captures the complex coordination environments associated with molecular adsorption at hybrid perovskite surfaces, constituting a heterogeneous, multicomponent test 7case that lies beyond the scope of typical pre-training datasets. 

# Validation across general and specific tasks 

As a first step in validating the different training protocols, we assess the root mean square errors (RMSEs) of the force components predicted by the potentials compared to DFT val-ues. The energy and force RMSEs for the different stages of the fine-tuning protocol are reported in Tables S5 and S6. We assess the retention of accuracy on more general tasks for hybrid perovskite modelling, and compare this with the accuracy on the specific target task of molecular passivation. To this end, we select structures from the D1 (‘hyP-26’) test set with chemical environments relevant to the specialised task, namely perovskite surface structures and MAPbI 3 defect configurations. Surface and defective environments are sampled in the 

D2 dataset as part of the surface–adsorbate structures, but the individual constitutents, viz. isolated surfaces and isolated molecules, are not. As such, testing on these related general tasks provides an informative test of transferability. When using MACE-MP-0b3 as the starting point in our training protocol, we observe signifi-cant variations in model performance between the different training approaches (Fig. 2a–c). Without fine-tuning, the zero-shot FM shows similar median force RMSEs for the hybrid perovskite surfaces and MAPbI 3 defect systems ( ≈ 200 meV/ ˚ A), with an increase in force RMSE for the specialised task (240 meV/ ˚ A). Fine-tuning MACE-MP-0b3 using the ‘FM →

AEAPTMS’ protocol decreases the error on the specialised task by ≈ 150 meV/ ˚ A, with good transferability to the surface systems. However, the errors show little improvement in the case of the MAPbI 3 defect systems. Switching to the CFT protocol (‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’) improves the performance on the MAPbI 3 defect structures and significantly reduces the vari-ance in the force predictions for this system. Direct fitting to the combined ‘hyP-26’ and spe-cialised D2 datasets yields the lowest RMSE across all three applications. As this approach does not involve sequential training stages, it avoids catastrophic forgetting of previously-learned information. However, training from scratch requires extensive, carefully curated 8AEAPTMS passivation Surfaces MAPbI 3 defects       

> abcdf
> MACE-MP-0b3: Specialised task MACE-MP-0b3: General task AEAPTMS passivation Surfaces MAPbI 3defects
> e
> MACE-MH-1: General task MACE-MH-1: Specialised task

Figure 2: Influence of fitting protocol on model performance for general and specialised tasks. 

Violin plots show errors expressed as force RMSEs for surface structures and MAPbI 3 defect systems (‘hyP-26’ test set), as well as the D2 specialised test set. Panels ( a)–( c) show results for MACE-MP-0b3 

as the starting FM, while panels ( d)–( f) show results for MACE-MH-1 . The dashed grey line in panel (b) marks the presence of values outside the y-axis range shown, up to 0.72 eV/ ˚ A. 

datasets and long training times, typically incurring much higher computational cost com-pared to fine-tuning approaches. Moreover, the resulting potential shows reduced transfer-ability to chemically-related amino-silane passivators in the specialised task (Fig. S4). By contrast, when using MACE-MH-1 as the starting point, the numerical differences between the directly-trained and fine-tuned potentials are substantially reduced across all test cases (Fig. 2d–f), consistent with the lower zero-shot RMSEs of this model, which are two to three times lower than those of the zero-shot MACE-MP-0b3 for the same systems. The variance is reduced across all three fitting approaches that depend on the choice of starting FM. In this case, the additional benefits of CFT over conventional fine-tuning for surface and defect environments are limited, suggesting that the wider coverage of the pre-training data under-pinning MACE-MH-1 provides good transferable accuracy as measured by error metrics. 9Energetics of passivator–surface interactions 

To study the energy prediction performance of the different MLIPs, we chose a metric rel-evant to application: the predicted adsorptions energies, Eads , for representative AEAPTMS coordination types at the perovskite surface. The assessment proceeds in two stages of in-creasing difficulty: (i) static single-point energy evaluation of DFT-relaxed structures; and (ii) MLIP-driven structural relaxation referenced against DFT ground-truth configurations. In the first stage, we compare MLIP single-point adsorption energies evaluated on DFT-relaxed structures to DFT reference values. The adsorption energy is defined as 

Eads = Esystem − (Esurface + Emolecule ) (1) where the three terms correspond to the relaxed adsorbate–surface system, the clean surface, and the isolated molecule, respectively. The Eads prediction of the ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ models is shown in Fig. 3a. The protocol using 

MACE-MH-1 as the starting FM shows a trend consistent with DFT for the relative stability of the different coordination types, with an approximately uniform overprediction of the binding stability by about –0.25 eV. In the case of MACE-MP-0b3 , the ‘N1’-coordinating system’s binding stability is overpredicted relative to the ‘N1/N2/O’ and ‘N2/O’ systems, but the latter show values nearly identical to the DFT Eads predictions. However, a more detailed analysis reveals that the close alignment with DFT values for the 

MACE-MP-0b3 ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model arises from a substantial cancellation of errors in the calculation of Eads , as revealed by the waterfall chart in Fig. 3b. The per-atom energy errors, more routinely reported in meV/atom, are shown in the Supplementary Information (Table S10). The isolated molecule and surface slab present the largest errors, which are significantly reduced when starting the training from the MACE-MH-1 FM, pre-trained on a dataset which includes organic molecules and surface systems. The Eads predictions of the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ models, presented in Fig. 3c, show 10 MACE-MP-0b3 MACE-MH-1 N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface Eads N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface Eads a bEnergy error (eV) FM→AEAPTMS FM→hyP -26→AEAPTMS −2 −1.5 −1 −0.5 00.5 1−2 −1.5 −1 −0.5 00.5 1N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface Eads N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface Eads Energy error (eV) MACE-MP-0b3 MACE-MH-1 c d

> E E

Figure 3: Error cancellation in MLIP static adsorption energy predictions. (a) Adsorption ener-gies predicted for the different coordination modes, with MLIP-predicted energies for the DFT-relaxed configurations, using the ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ fitting protocol. ( b) Waterfall plot breaking down the en-ergy errors contributing to the MLIPs’ deviation from DFT-predicted Eads for the ‘N1/N2/O’ system. The light grey shading shows a positive error compared to the DFT value (energy overprediction), while the darker grey shading shows a negative error (energy underprediction). ( c)–( d) As above, but now for the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ fitting protocol. 

11 a very similar trend to the conventional fine-tuning protocol characterised in Fig. 3a. Yet, the analysis of energy errors illustrated by the waterfall chart (Fig. 3d) shows a significant improvement compared to ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ when starting from the MACE-MP-0b3 FM, which is masked by the cancellation of errors. In the case of MACE-MH-1 , only the energy error on the surface system shows an improvement when adopting the CFT protocol. A similar analysis for the ‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’ model, and additionally for models derived from the MACE-MPA-0 and MACE-OMAT-0 FMs, are provided in the Supplementary Information (Fig. S5 and Fig. S6 and Tables S7–S9). The zero-shot model results are not presented here due to the large deviations from the DFT reference, with adsorption energy errors exceeding 2 eV when using MACE-MP-0b3 in the fine-tuning protocol, but it is also available in the Supplementary Information (Fig. S5). In the second stage of evaluation, we use the MLIPs to drive structural relaxation into the four different coordination types. This scenario challenges the MLIP’s ability to accurately map the potential energy surface across the relaxation pathway: a failure to do so will cause the MLIP to converge to a geometry inconsistent with that obtained by DFT relaxation. The values of Eads predicted by the MLIP for the MLIP-relaxed structures are compared to the DFT-predicted energies of the DFT-relaxed structures in Figs. 4a–b. (The DFT single-point energies for the same MLIP-relaxed structures show a similar trend: see Figs. S7–S8.) For MACE-MP-0b3 -derived models (Fig. 4a), the fine-tuned MLIPs relax the system into con-figurations with Eads deviations of up to 1 eV from the DFT reference. The ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model shows the largest energetic error for the surface system (Table S10), suggesting that the MLIP has failed to find the energy minimum during relaxation. The cancellation of errors of similar magnitudes for the ‘N1/N2/O’ and ‘N2/O’ systems and the surface structure lead to the perceived agreement between the DFT- and MLIP-predicted Eads value for these con-figuration types. Adopting the CFT-like protocol (Fig. 1a) significantly reduces the error on the surface structure, with less improvement shown for the surface–adsorbate system. When using MACE-MH-1 as the starting point, these errors are substantially reduced, with max-12 SOAP similarity   

> ≤ 0.5
> 1
> FM→AEAPTMS FM→hyP-26→AEAPTMS FM→AEAPTMS FM→hyP-26→AEAPTMS
> c
> Average score: 0.851 Average score: 0.882 Average score: 0.975 Average score: 0.954
> aMACE-MP-0b3 b
> DFT FM→AEAPTMS FM→hyP-26→AEAPTMS
> MACE-MH-1

Figure 4: MLIP-driven relaxation of the amino-silane molecule passivating the hybrid per-ovskite surface. (a) Adsorption energies predicted for the different coordination modes, with 

MACE-MP-0b3 -derived MLIP-predicted energies for the MLIP-relaxed configurations. The DFT-predicted energies of the DFT-relaxed structures are shown in black. ( b) Same, but for MACE-MH-1 -derived MLIPs. ( c) Structural similarity of the MLIP-relaxed structures compared to the DFT-relaxed systems for each coordination type. Atom colors indicate their SOAP similarity to the corresponding atoms in the ground-truth DFT-relaxed configuration, as visualized using OVITO. 37 

imum Eads deviations below 0.5 eV (Fig. 4b). This improvement relative to MACE-MP-0b3 -derived models, as well as to the directly-trained potential (Fig. S7) is attributed to the inclu-sion of reactive organic systems, surface slabs, and adsorbate complexes in the pre-training data of MACE-MH-1 .32 Zero-shot results are reported in Fig. S9. However, such high numerical accuracy may not always be required when performing quali-tative chemical analyses. FMs or fine-tuned models are now commonly used to obtain broad structural insights and trends in varied systems of interest. 12,13,38 To decouple structural vali-dation from the validation of predicted energies, we therefore quantify the similarity between MLIP-relaxed and DFT-relaxed structures using the SOAP similarity metric, 31 as shown in 13 Fig. 4c. In this metric, a score of 1 corresponds to identical local environments, while a score of 0 indicates completely dissimilar environments. The atoms are colour-coded ac-cording to their SOAP similarity to the corresponding atom in the respective DFT-relaxed system. Across all models, the largest deviations from the DFT structures are observed within the hybrid perovskite surface slab. Consistent with the Eads analysis, when start-ing from MACE-MP-0b3 , the CFT MLIP produces structures more closely approaching the DFT references than those obtained using conventional FT on D2 alone. When derived from 

MACE-MH-1 , both fine-tuned models show a significantly improved performance in the struc-tural relaxation task compared to the MACE-MP-0b3 -based models; moreover, they surpass the performance of the directly-trained model (Fig. S10). The ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ MLIP in fact averages a slightly higher SOAP similarity score over the four different coordination types compared to the CFT protocol (‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’). We link this observation to the already adequate performance of the zero-shot model: interestingly, used out-of-the-box, the performance of MACE-MH-1 in structural relaxation matches that of MACE-MP-0b3 fine-tuned for AEAPTMS (Fig. S11). In contrast, the zero-shot MACE-MP-0b3 model produces pronounced structural distortions, including Pb–I bonds elongated by up to ≈ 30% relative to the DFT result, particularly along the surface-normal direction. The average similarity scores of the configurations obtained with potentials based on different FMs are given in Table S12. 

# Data-driven atomistic modelling of molecular passivation 

To show its application in a real-world chemical scenario, we use the MACE-MH-1 -derived ’FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ model to run MD simulations of a mixed hybrid perovskite sur-face passivated with an increasing number of AEAPTMS molecules; this simulation set-up resembles an experimental increase in deposition time and surface coverage. For each chosen surface passivation coverage, 5 independent MLIP-driven MD runs were performed holding at 450 K for 500 ps, followed by structural relaxation with the MLIP. As such, the final struc-tures reflect the transient configurations adopted by AEAPTMS as it diffuses and reorients 14 on the surface at the finite simulation temperature, rather than representing the global en-ergy minimum alone. For the purposes of this study, we have focused on a Pb-terminated Cs 0.12 FA 0.88 PbI 0.75 Br 0.25 surface without additional vacancies or interstitial defects; study-ing the effect of such defective surfaces would be a valuable addition for future work. The variation of Eads with increasing passivation coverage is shown in Fig. 5a, this time calculated by dividing the expression in Equation 1 by the number of molecules present at the surface. For a single molecule, the five independent runs yield a range of coordination geometries (shown on the left; 1–5), resulting in the substantial variance of Eads . The multi-dentate ‘N1/N2/O’ coordination ( 5) shows an Eads value of just under −3 eV, consistent with previously reported ab initio results for AEAPTMS binding to a pristine surface. 3 As the number of passivating molecules increases, contributions from different coordination types average out, the variance decreases, and Eads stabilises at ≈ − 1.5 eV. Notably, increasing AEAPTMS surface coverage exerts a measurable effect on the underlying perovskite structure, as illustrated in Fig. 5b. Octahedral tilting, quantified by the Pb–X–Pb angle as a deviation from the ideal cubic value of 180 ◦, is a sensitive probe of structural dis-tortion. A previous ab initio study reported average tilt angles of 11 ◦ for FAPI and ≈ 20 ◦

for FA 0.9Rb 0.1PbI 3.39 Our simulations of Cs 0.12 FA 0.88 PbI 0.75 Br 0.25 yield an average close to 15 ◦, consistent with these reports. The tilting increases as the surface becomes saturated with AEAPTMS molecules, reaching an average value of ≈ 20 ◦ for the Pb–X–Pb angle. The increase in octahedral tilting is coupled with an elongation of the Pb–X bonds, linked to the lattice disruption determined by the increased density of AEAPTMS molecules at the surface. This effect is shown in Fig. 5c–e, presenting a top view of the simulated surfaces with a variation in molecular passivator coverage. A decrease in the number of ordered, valid octahedra is observed with an increase in passivation coverage. Here, a PbX 6 octahedron is classified as valid if it presents the expected coordination (6-fold in the bulk layers and 5-fold at the surface, with the apical halide missing) and maintains corner-sharing connectivity with neighbouring octahedra. For the single-molecule case (Fig. 5c), all octahedra across the 5 MD repeats retained their expected structural order. At the highest coverage studied (Fig. 5e, 15 a b      

> 1 molecule (0.03 )25 molecules (0.8 )40 molecules (1.28 )
> 12345c
> 12345
> Single molecule
> de
> Increasing passivation coverage

Figure 5: The link between increased passivation coverage and structural disruption of the perovskite surface. (a) Adsorption energy as a function of passivation coverage, averaged over 5 independent MD runs and subsequently relaxed using the MACE-MH-1 -derived ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ model. The left panel shows the diversity in observed coordination types for a single molecule passivating the surface. ( b) Change in Pb–X–Pb angles (octahedral tilts) and Pb–X bond lengths at the hybrid perovskite surface with increasing passivation coverage. ( c) (Top panel) Top view of the MLIP-driven MD simulation with a single molecule coordinating at the surface. (Bottom panel) Close-up snapshot from the simulation, showing the molecule coordinating at the surface. ( d)Same, but for a passivation coverage of 0.80 molecules/nm 2. ( e) Same, but for a passivation coverage of 1.28 molecules/nm 2, where the molecule starts penetrating into the surface. Note that the lower panels show only selected molecules; the overall surface coverage can be seen in the top-view panels above. Structural visualisations were produced using OVITO. 37 

16 1.28 molecules/nm 2), our simulations yield an average of 91.5% ± 4.2% valid octahedra, with 7.1% ± 3.7% defective (predominantly undercoordinated) polyhedra and 1.4% ± 1.2% exhibiting edge- or face-sharing connectivity (Fig. S12). The progressive increase in struc-tural disorder with passivation coverage is in agreement with the experimentally-observed decrease in XRD peak intensities with increasing AEAPTMS deposition time. 4

The amino-silane molecules can penetrate into the surface, as previously shown by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry, with AEAPTMS showing comparatively less pen-etration than related passivators. 3 This explains the breaking-down of the octahedral lattice order, as molecules change to an upright orientation with increased passivation coverage, as illustrated in the simulation snapshots in the bottom panels of Fig. 5c–e. As the molecules start reaching below the surface, the corner-sharing connectivity between the octahedra is disturbed (Fig. 5e and Fig. S13). Thus, the experimentally observed decline in passivation effectiveness at longer deposition times 4 can be linked to the evolution of molecular orientation with passivation coverage. As molecular density increases, steric interactions between methoxy groups of neighbouring molecules disfavour multidentate coordination, instead promoting an upright orientation in which the molecules point downward with the N atoms coordinating to the surface. This is reflected in the elongation of Pb–N bonds and the near-complete disappearance of Pb–O contacts at high coverage (Fig. S14). The prevalence of upright silane orientations and N-mediated surface coordination is consistent with angle-resolved XPS measurement reports, 2

and our high-coverage snapshots more realistically mirror experimental deposition conditions than what can be achieved using single-molecule simulations. 

# Discussion 

Focusing on the molecular passivation of hybrid perovskite materials, we have explored the role of data in MLIP training for chemically heterogeneous systems. We showed that, where relevant configurations are underrepresented in the pre-training dataset, an approach resem-17 bling continual fine-tuning can be useful: integrating large, curated, material-specific datasets as an intermediate step in the training pipeline. Many such datasets are already available, 40–42 

and our work has added our ‘hyP-26’ dataset to this growing body of resources. Following fine-tuning on this intermediate dataset (‘ D1 ’ in Figure 1a), we then further fine-tune on highly-specialised data (‘ D2 ’): an example of where this works well is the MACE-MP-0b3 

model primarily pre-trained on inorganic structures, 9 which is improved by explicit expo-sure to the ‘N1/N2/O’ multidentate coordination of the amino-silane molecule. In contrast, the more recently developed MACE-MH-1 model 32 can already ‘discover’ this type of struc-ture during relaxation, and does not benefit in the same way from multistep fine-tuning. In the longer run, we therefore expect to see convergence in terms of the coverage achieved by pre-training datasets and foundational MLIPs. From a materials chemistry perspective, our simulations provide atomistic insights into the structural disruption at perovskite surfaces induced by amino-silane molecules – thus offer-ing a microscopic explanation for the experimentally-observed reduced crystallinity in films and the surface charge blocking effect in devices with excessive deposition time of passiva-tion molecules. 4 We had a first look at the dynamic effects at real perovskite surfaces, as we modelled the collective behaviour of an increasing number of passivating molecules: a larger number of steric interactions between methoxysilane groups at higher passivation coverages induce a shift in molecular orientation towards upright configurations. This steric crowd-ing drives the amino-silane molecule to coordinate through its N atoms alone, rather than involving additional O →Pb binding, and the molecule is able to penetrate into the surface with disordering effects upon the perovskite lattice. Hence, beyond binding efficacy, the de-sign of future molecular passivators ought to take into account steric effects, intermolecular interactions, and deposition-time/molecular coverage effects: for molecular passivators with significant steric bulk, the optimum deposition time should balance maximising favourable passivator–surface interactions with minimising intermolecular interactions. A limitation of the present work is our focus on the Pb-terminated (001) surface of the per-ovskite, without accounting for reactions between the FA + cations and the amino-silane pas-18 sivator molecules, or for possible intermolecular coupling of the latter. 2 A logical next step is therefore to further expand the scope of our molecular-passivation simulations, exploring questions of reactivity and the effect of different defect types at the surface; to this end, the ‘hyP-26’ dataset could be supplemented with relevant configurations from existing datasets containing hybrid perovskite defect structures 15 or reactive organic systems. 43 

With a long-term view, we anticipate that MLIP-driven simulations can enable the screening of thousands of different molecules that could be used for passivating perovskite films before laboratory tests are carried out. Beyond screening already-known molecules for desirable properties, integrating generative models into the protocol could speed up the design and se-lection of optimised passivators. Computational materials design has historically focused on bulk crystalline structures, with notable examples for perovskite materials, 44–46 and has be-gun to extend to the amorphous state. 47,48 In this context, our study now provides a blueprint for modelling – and a stepping stone for designing – heterogeneous multi-component systems in materials chemistry. For solar-cell materials, understanding additives and passivators, and their collective behaviour, is important for improving device operability and durability. Ulti-mately, a close integration of initial computational screening, property prediction, and exper-imental verification could therefore enable reliable ‘digital experiments’ guiding the design of photovoltaic devices. 19 Methods 

MLIP fitting. All MLIP models reported herein are based on the MACE architecture 29 

and pre-trained models, 9 subsequently fine-tuned using the graph-pes software, version 0.2.0. 49,58 Four different pre-trained models were used, viz. MACE-MP-0b3 , MACE-MPA-0 ,

MACE-OMAT-0 , and MACE-MH-1 ; these models had been initially trained using the MPTrj, 25 

MPTrj+sAlex, 28 OMAT24, 26 and a combination of the OMAT/OMOL 27 /OC20 24 /MATPES 50 

datasets, in the stated order (in the notation of Fig. 1, these are the respective D0 datasets). In all cases, we used a ‘medium’ model size, with a maximum degree of equivariance of L = 1, meaning that the irreducible representations of the messages have alternating parity, 128x0e + 128x1o . Details about the hyperparameters are given in Supplementary Note 1. 

Reference data. The general metal and hybrid perovskite dataset, here denoted ‘hyP-26’, was constructed using a combination of data augmentation techniques, MD snapshots, and 

de novo exploration 51 using autoplex ;52 details about its full composition and the protocol used in its construction are given in Supplementary Note 2. The specialised dataset for mod-elling molecular passivation, D2 , was constructed from a combination of relaxation and NVT MD snapshots. Starting structures were constructed with the passivating molecule [3-(2-aminoethylamino)propyl]trimethoxysilane (AEAPTMS) coordinating via its O or N atoms to Cs 0.12 FA 0.88 PbI 0.75 Br 0.25 surface slabs. Both reference datasets were labelled with density-functional theory (DFT) data, obtained using the projector augmented-wave method 53 as implemented in the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP). 54–56 The computations were performed at the SCAN 57 level of theory (Supplementary Note 3). 

MD simulations. ML-driven MD simulations (Fig. 5) were carried out using the ASE MACE calculator provided by graph-pes .58 For each passivation coverage, 5 independent runs were performed at 450 K using the Langevin thermostat implemented in ASE , holding for 500 ps with a timestep of 1 fs. The MD annealing was followed by structural relaxations driven by the MACE-MH-1 -derived ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ MLIP using the LBFGSLineSearch al-gorithm, with a force tolerance of 0.075 eV ˚ A−1. The simulated structures contained between 1,816 and 3,220 atoms (dependent on molecular coverage), with surface slab dimensions of 

≈ 60 ×50 ˚ A2 and a vacuum size of 50 ˚ A along the z-axis (slab models being constructed via pymatgen 59 ). For bond-length calculations, the Pb–X intermolecular distances were av-eraged over all contacts up to a cut-off of 3.8 ˚ A. The values for the octahedral tilting are reported as 180 ◦ − γ, where γ is the Pb–X–Pb angle along the x-axis; for a cubic perovskite phase, the Pb–X–Pb angle along the x-axis is taken as representative of the in-plane octahe-dral tilting, as tilting in the y-direction is equivalent by symmetry. 20 Data availability 

Data supporting this work are available at https://github.com/vldgroup/papers-hyP-26. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Yuxing Zhou for help with autoplex runs, and Litong Wu for useful discussions. L.-B.P. acknowledges funding from the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Inorganic Chemistry for Future Manufacturing (OxICFM), EP/S023828/1. We are grateful for compu-tational support from the UK national high performance computing service, ARCHER2, 60 

for which access was obtained via the UKCP consortium and funded by EPSRC grant ref EP/X035891/1. 

# References 

1. Helal Miah, M. et al. Key degradation mechanisms of perovskite solar cells and strategies for enhanced stability: issues and prospects. RSC Advances 15 , 628–654 (2025). 2. Jariwala, S. et al. Reducing surface recombination velocity of methylammonium-free mixed-cation mixed-halide perovskites via surface passivation. Chemistry of Materials 

33 , 5035–5044 (2021). 3. Lin, Y.-H. et al. Bandgap-universal passivation enables stable perovskite solar cells with low photovoltage loss. Science 384 , 767–775 (2024). 4. Huang, Z. et al. Surface passivation for halide optoelectronics: Comparing optimization and reactivity of amino-silanes with formamidinium. Journal of the American Chemical Society 147 , 42918–42925 (2025). 5. Lu, D. et al. 86 pflops deep potential molecular dynamics simulation of 100 million atoms with ab initio accuracy. Computer Physics Communications 259 , 107624 (2021). 6. Morrow, J. D. et al. Understanding defects in amorphous silicon with million-atom simu-lations and machine learning. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 63 , e202403842 (2024). 7. Bian, T., Zhu, W., Lei, Q. & Yin, J. Machine learning potentials for inorganic and hybrid lead halide perovskites: From phase stability to defects and interfaces. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 18 , 17219–17238 (2026). 21 8. Deng, B. et al. Overcoming systematic softening in universal machine learning inter-atomic potentials by fine-tuning (2024). arXiv:2405.07105 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 9. Batatia, I. et al. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry. The Journal of Chemical Physics 163 , 184110 (2025). 10. El Aisnada, A. N. et al. Cost-effective strategy of enhancing machine learning potentials by transfer learning from a multicomponent data set on ænet-pytorch. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 129 , 658–669 (2025). 11. Tompa, T. et al. Fine-tuning MLIP foundation models: strategies for accuracy and trans-ferability (2026). arXiv:2606.12704 [physics.chem-ph]. 12. Echeverri Restrepo, S., Mohandas, N. K., Sluiter, M. H. F. & Paxton, A. T. Applica-bility of universal machine learning interatomic potentials to the simulation of steels. 

Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 33 , 035003 (2025). 13. Kempen, L. H. E., Cheula, R. & Andersen, M. How accurate are foundational machine learning interatomic potentials for heterogeneous catalysis? (2025). arXiv:2512.16702 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 14. Wu, Z. et al. A machine learning interatomic potential data set and model for catalysis with local fine-tuning to chemical accuracy. JACS Au 5, 6151–6161 (2025). 15. Biswas, M., Desai, R., Bidna, G. & Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A. Unified graph-based interatomic potential for perovskite structure optimization. Journal of Chemical Infor-mation and Modeling 66 , 1353–1370 (2026). 16. Zhang, Z., Fang, M., Chen, L. & Namazi-Rad, M.-R. CITB: A Benchmark for Continual Instruction Tuning (2023). arXiv:2310.14510 [cs.CL]. 17. Aggarwal, D., Damle, S., Goyal, N., Lokam, S. & Sitaram, S. Exploring Contin-ual Fine-Tuning for Enhancing Language Ability in Large Language Model (2024). arXiv.2410.16006 [cs.CL]. 18. Guan, C. et al. Multi-stage LLM fine-tuning with a continual learning setting. In Chiruzzo, L., Ritter, A. & Wang, L. (eds.) Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , 5499–5513 (2025). 19. Ahlawat, D. et al. A family of large language models for materials research with insights into model adaptability in continued pretraining. Nature Machine Intelligence 8, 435– 448 (2026). 22 20. Eckhoff, M. & Reiher, M. Lifelong machine learning potentials for chemical reaction network explorations. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 21 , 9641–9656 (2025). 21. Kim, J. et al. An efficient forgetting-aware fine-tuning framework for pretrained univer-sal machine-learning interatomic potentials. npj Computational Materials 12 , 26 (2026). 22. Liu, X. et al. An AI-ready fine-tuning framework for accurate machine-learning in-teratomic potentials in solid-solid battery interfaces (2026). arXiv:2601.17847 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 23. Wong, N. H. & Yang, J. H. Bias in Universal Machine-Learned Interatomic Potentials and Its Effects on Fine-Tuning. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation , DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.6c00425 (2026). 24. Chanussot, L. et al. Open catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and community challenges. ACS Catalysis 11 , 6059–6072 (2021). 25. Deng, B. et al. CHGNet as a pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed atomistic modelling. Nature Machine Intelligence 5, 1031–1041 (2023). 26. Barroso-Luque, L. et al. The Open Materials 2024 (OMat24) inorganic materials dataset and models. Nature Computational Science , DOI: 10.1038/s43588-026-00996-w (2026). 27. Levine, D. et al. The Open Molecules 2025 (OMol25) Dataset, Evaluations, and Models (2025). arXiv:2505.08762 [physics.chem-ph]. 28. Cavignac, T. et al. AI-Driven Expansion and Application of the Alexandria Database. 

Journal of Physics: Materials 9, 025014 (2026). 29. Batatia, I., Kovacs, D. P., Simm, G., Ortner, C. & Csanyi, G. MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. In Koyejo, S. et al. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, 11423–11436 (2022). 30. McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N. & Großberger, L. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approxi-mation and Projection. Journal of Open Source Software 3, 861 (2018). 31. Bart´ ok, A. P., Kondor, R. & Cs´ anyi, G. On representing chemical environments. Physical Review B 87 , 184115 (2013). 32. Batatia, I. et al. Cross Learning between Electronic Structure Theories for Uni-23 fying Molecular, Surface, and Inorganic Crystal Foundation Force Fields (2025). arXiv:2510.25380 [physics.chem-ph]. 33. Taniguchi, T. Knowledge distillation of neural network potential for molecular crystals. 

Faraday Discussions 256 , 139–155 (2025). 34. Johnson, M. S. et al. Fusing Delta Learning and Machine Learned Interatomic Potentials for Efficient High Throughput Calculation of Surface Kinetic Parameters (2026). DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv.15000328/v1. 35. Shi, Y. et al. (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane surface passivation improves perovskite solar cell performance by reducing surface recombination velocity. ACS Energy Letters 

7, 4081–4088 (2022). 36. McMeekin, D. P. et al. Crystallization Kinetics and Morphology Control of Formami-dinium–Cesium Mixed-Cation Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskite via Tunability of the Col-loidal Precursor Solution. Advanced Materials 29 , 1607039 (2017). 37. Stukowski, A. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO-the Open Visualization Tool. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineer-ing 18 , 015012 (2010). 38. Ng, E. Z. X., Ang, S. J., Yang, H., Chen, Y. & Wong, M. W. Accelerated and efficient modeling of low-κ organosilicate glass with the M3GNet machine learning interatomic potentials. Computational Materials Today 8, 100042 (2025). 39. Ghosh, D., Walsh Atkins, P., Islam, M. S., Walker, A. B. & Eames, C. Good Vibrations: Locking of Octahedral Tilting in Mixed-Cation Iodide Perovskites for Solar Cells. ACS Energy Letters 2, 2424–2429 (2017). 40. Zhou, Y., Zhang, W., Ma, E. & Deringer, V. L. Research data for ”Device-scale atomistic modelling of phase-change memory materials” (2023). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.8208202. 41. Ibragimova, R., Kuklin, M. S. & Caro, M. A. Dataset for CH GAP interatomic potential (2024). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10925480. 42. Biswas, M. Unified graph-based interatomic potential for perovskite structure optimiza-tion (2025). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.17363611. 43. Lee, K. et al. A comprehensive dataset of chemical reactions covering second and third row elements with million-scale quantum calculations (2025). DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2025-bh42x. 24 44. Chenebuah, E. T., Nganbe, M. & Tchagang, A. B. A deep generative modeling architec-ture for designing lattice-constrained perovskite materials. npj Computational Materials 

10 , 198 (2024). 45. Li, W., Jacobs, R. & Morgan, D. Predicting the thermodynamic stability of perovskite oxides using machine learning models. Computational Materials Science 150 , 454–463 (2018). 46. Zhang, Y. et al. Machine Learning for Designing Perovskites and Perovskite-Inspired Solar Materials: Emerging Opportunities and Challenges. Advanced Science 13 , e74952 (2026). 47. Liu, Y., Madanchi, A., Anker, A. S., Simine, L. & Deringer, V. L. The amorphous state as a frontier in computational materials design. Nature Reviews Materials 10 , 228–241 (2025). 48. Yang, K. & Schwalbe-Koda, D. A generative diffusion model for amorphous materials. 

npj Computational Materials 12 , 29 (2025). 49. Gardner, J. graph-pes : train and use graph-based ML models of potential energy sur-faces (2024). URL https://github.com/vldgroup/graph-pes .50. Kaplan, A. D. et al. A Foundational Potential Energy Surface Dataset for Materials (2025). arXiv:2503.04070 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 51. Bernstein, N., Cs´ anyi, G. & Deringer, V. L. De novo exploration and self-guided learning of potential-energy surfaces. npj Computational Materials 5, 99 (2019). 52. Liu, Y. et al. An automated framework for exploring and learning potential-energy sur-faces. Nature Communications 16 , 7666 (2025). 53. Bl¨ ochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Physical Review B 50 , 17953–17979 (1994). 54. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨ uller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Computational Materials Science 6,15–50 (1996). 55. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨ uller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calcu-lations using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B 54 , 11169–11186 (1996). 56. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method. Physical Review B 59 , 1758–1775 (1999). 25 57. Sun, J., Ruzsinszky, A. & Perdew, J. Strongly Constrained and Appropriately Normed Semilocal Density Functional. Physical Review Letters 115 , 036402 (2015). 58. Gardner, J. graph-pes: train and use graph-based ML models of potential energy surfaces. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.14956210. 59. Tran, R. et al. Surface energies of elemental crystals. Scientific Data 3, 160080 (2016). 60. Beckett, G. et al. ARCHER2 Service Description (2024). DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.14507040. 26 Supplementary Information for 

# ‘Data-driven atomistic modelling of hybrid halide perovskite passivation’ 

## Laura-Bianca Pas ¸ca 1, Henry J. Snaith 2, and Volker L. Deringer *1 

> 1

Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 

> 2

Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK  

> *E-mail: volker.deringer@chem.ox.ac.uk

1Supplementary Note 1 (Fine-tuning protocol) 

All fine-tuned MLIPs were obtained using the graph-pes Python package, version 0.2.0. S1 

Four different pre-trained MACE models ( MACE-MP-0b3 , MACE-MPA-0 , MACE-OMAT-0 , MACE-MH-1 ), S2,S3 all with a ‘medium’ model size, were fine-tuned on the full ‘hyP-26’ dataset. A cut-off radius of 6 ˚ A was used, with weights for energy, force, and virial set to (λE , λF , λv) = (1, 10 , 100 ) in the loss function, which are commonly recommended settings for fine-tuning MACE-based FMs. S4 For the fine-tuning step on the specialised D2 dataset, the weights were adjusted to (λE , λF , λv) = ( 1, 50 , 1), as this was found to substantially improve force predic-tions (a drop in force RMSE on the AEAPTMS test set of around 50% when compared to an equivalent model fine-tuned using the (1,10,100) hyperparameters). We used the Adam optimiser S5 with the learning rate set to 10 −4; for MACE-MH-1 , a value of 10 −5 was selected when fine-tuning on ‘hyP-26’, as it led to improved performance in the CFT pipeline, assessed by the adsorption energy ( Eads ) benchmark on the AEAPTMS system. The PyTorch scheduler ReduceLROnPlateau was used to reduce the learning rate by a factor of 0.5 if the monitored loss on the validation set did not improve for 5 consecutive epochs. Training was performed for a maximum of 100 epochs. Stochastic weight averaging (SWA) was enabled after 80 epochs, during which the energy and force loss weights were increased to λE = 1000 and λF = 100, respectively. Early stopping was applied such that training was terminated if the validation-set accuracy did not improve for 20 consecutive epochs (15 consecutive epochs when fine-tuning on D2 ), using a force RMSE tolerance of 10 −3 eV/ ˚ A. The same training conditions were maintained for the directly-trained model (‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’). The test-set energy and force component RMSE values for the ‘hyP-26’-fine-tuned models (‘FM →hyP-26 ’) are shown in Table S5, and those for ‘FM →AEAPTMS ’ and ‘FM →hyP-26 → AEAPTMS’ are shown in Table S6. With the multi-head fine-tuning protocol implemented in mace-torch ,S3 the MACE-MP-0b3 -derived ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model showed an energy RMSE of 9.9 meV/atom and a force RMSE of 73.8 meV/ ˚ A, while the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ model showed an energy RMSE of 10.0 meV/atom and a force RMSE of 71.1 meV/ ˚ A; the MACE-OMAT-0 -derived ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model yielded an energy RMSE of 7.7 meV/atom and a force RMSE of 59.9 meV/ ˚ A, while the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ showed energy and force RMSEs of 14.2 meV/atom and 81.6 meV/ ˚ A, respectively. We did not have an implementation of the multi-head fine-tuning protocol available when the research for this study was conducted, and as such we did not pursue this direction in the present work. 2Supplementary Note 2 (Components of the reference datasets) 

## Construction of the general ‘hyP-26’ dataset 

The total number of structures and atoms in each class is provided in Table S1. 

Distorted crystalline structures 

For each of the most common metal halide and hybrid halide perovskites (CsPbI 3, CsSnI 3,MAPbI 3, FAPbI 3), three different crystalline phases (orthorhombic, tetragonal, and cubic) were included in the training dataset, as detailed in Table S2. Structures were distorted by scaling the unit-cell volume from –7% to +7% in increments of 1% and by varying the cell angles from –30 ◦ to +30 ◦ in increments of 5 ◦ relative to the reference structure. Each volume-scaled structure was additionally rattled using the modified Monte Carlo rattling procedure implemented in hiPhive ,S6 with a displacement standard deviation of 2.5% and a minimum interatomic distance of 1 ˚ A. The most common crystalline phases of PbX 2 (X = Cl, Br, I) were included following the same protocol, with volume scaling from –5% to +5% and angle variations from –10 ◦ to +10 ◦.For the hybrid perovskites, additional structures sampling octahedral tilting and molecular cation rotations were included. Octahedral tilts were generated using perovskite rotater ,S7 

which implements the 14 tilting patterns for a cubic perovskite unit cell. For simplicity, only cubic CsPbI 3 was used to generate PbI 6 rotations of up to 40 ◦ in increments of 5 ◦. The ef-fect of compositional substitution on octahedral tilting was assumed to be captured by the MD snapshots included elsewhere in the dataset (see ‘NPT MD snapshots’ below), and the influence of the A-site cation on the crystal structure was taken to be primarily steric in nature ( rCs = 1.88 ˚ A ≈ rMA = 2.17 ˚ AS8 ), with limited contribution to the electronic struc-ture. S9,S10 

Molecular cation rotations were sampled by rigidly rotating the organic cation up to 40 ◦ in increments of 5 ◦ along each Cartesian axis independently and along all three axes simulta-neously, while keeping the inorganic framework fixed. Structures in which any interatomic distance fell below the sum of the crystal radii of the two atoms involved were discarded; the relevant distance thresholds are given in Table S3. 

Site occupancy disordered structures 

Site occupancy disorder modelling, as implemented in sod ,S11 was used to create site-disordered structures with mixed-cation or mixed-anion compositions. The generated structures were then each volume-scaled from –2% to 2% in increments of 1%. The mixed-anion structures were additionally MC-rattled with a standard deviation of 5% using hiphive .S6 

31. Mixed-cation structures. For the (Cs, FA), (Cs, MA), and (MA, FA) mixed-cation com-positions, site-disordered supercells were generated from two starting structures: a 2 ×

2×2 cubic unit cell, with the lattice parameter estimated using Vegard’s law, S12 and the tetragonal unit cell taken from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD), S13 de-pendent on the A-site cation ratios: for the cubic supercells, cation ratios of 12.5/87.5, 25/75, 50/50, 75/25, and 87.5/12.5 were sampled; for the tetragonal cells, ratios of 25/75, 50/50, and 75/25 were generated. 2. Mixed-anion structures. Only the (I, Br) and (Br, Cl) compositions were considered, as the (I, Cl) mixture was found to be experimentally unstable due to the size mismatch between the I − and Cl − anions. S14 For the CsPbI xBr 1−x and CsPbBr xCl 1−x compo-sitions, the tetragonal cell was used to obtain structures substituted in increments of 16.67, 33.33, 50, 66.67, and 83.33% of Br substitution. For the hybrid perovskite (I, Br) compositions, both cubic and tetragonal unit cells were used as starting structures. The cubic phase was sampled at Br fractions of 4.2, 8.3, 25, 33.3, and 66.7%, reflecting the experimental observation that higher Br content stabilises the cubic phase; S15 the tetragonal phase was sampled at 8.3 and 16.7%. For the (Br, Cl) compositions, only Cl substitutions of 4.2, 8.3, and 16.7% were considered, consistent with the low Cl doping levels relevant to experimental mixed-anion perovskites. S16 

Hard-sphere randomized structures 

Randomised structures were generated under hard-sphere (minimum-distance) constraints, each containing 27 A-site cations, 27 B-site cations, and 81 anions, at a density of 4.1 g cm −3

representative of an amorphous phase derived from perovskite materials. S17 The A-site was populated with MA, FA, and Cs in random proportions, the B-site with Pb and Sn in random ratios, and the halide sites with I, Br, and Cl, with the Cl content constrained to a maximum of 5% of the total halide count. 

GAP-driven random structure search (GAP-RSS) structures 

Random structure search (RSS) structures can be additions to large, generalised datasets which aim to cover a broad range of material phases, including amorphous or polycrys-talline materials. S18,S19 For each of the common iodide crystal phases (CsPbI 3, MAPbI 3 and FAPbI 3), we included 1,000 RSS structures obtained across 10 iterations of the GAP-RSS protocol S18,S20 implemented in the autoplex framework. S21 The structures were restricted to between 1 and 8 formula units, with a minimum distance requirement (# MINDIST ( ˚ A): Cs − Cs = 4, Cs − Pb = 5, Cs − I = 4, Pb − Pb = 5, Pb − I = 3.04, I − I = 3.5 for CsPbI 3,C − C = 3.5, C − Pb = 5, C − I = 4, Pb − Pb = 5, Pb − I = 3.04, I − I = 4, H − H = 1.66, C − H = 1.09, N − H = 1.03, C − N = 1.49, N − N = 2 for MAPbI 3 and FAPbI 3). 4To describe the atomic environments in the GAP models, S22 we used an expansion into a squared-exponential two-body, three-body, and a smooth overlap of atomic positions (SOAP) S23 

term with maximum number of radial and angular basis functions of nmax = 8 and lmax = 6, respectively. The SOAP kernel function was set to a dot product with exponent ζ = 4. Details about the hyperparameters of the SOAP descriptor are given in Table S4. 

NPT MD snapshots 

An MLIP directly-trained on the dataset described above was used to run MD simulations in the NPT ensemble. Three 2 × 2 × 2 cubic supercells were generated using the special quasi-random (SQS) structure approach S24 implemented in the sqsgenerator S25 Python package, with compositions of Cs 0.15 FA 0.85 PbI 0.77 Br 0.23 , Cs 0.25 FA 0.75 PbI 0.75 Br 0.21 Cl 0.4, and Cs 0.15 FA 0.6MA 0.3Pb 0.5Sn 0.5I3. The unit-cell length was set to 6.24 ˚ A, as expected from the Vegard’s-law trend observed experimentally for structures with a similar stoichiometric composition. S12 The three different structural models were then used to run NPT simulations starting from 300 K, with an initial annealing step of 10 ps, and then heating up to 600 K over 9 ns. The gradual heating of the three different structures was evenly sampled to select 100 snapshots from each simulation, which were added to the training dataset. 

Defects 

Vacancies, substitutional and interstitial defects were generated using the workflow imple-mented in the doped Python package. S26 Defects were thus generated for MAPbI 3 (vacan-cies, substitutional and interstitial defects), CsPbI 3, CsPbBr 3 (only vacancies and substitu-tional defects) and CsPbCl 3 (only Cl vacancies). 

Surface structures 

The SlabGenerator function in the pymatgen S27 core package was used to generate sur-face slab models representing the (001), (110) and (111) surfaces of CsPbI 3, MAPbI 3, FAPbI 3,Cs 0.15 FA 0.85 PbI 0.77 Br 0.23 , Cs 0.25 FA 0.75 PbI 0.75 Br 0.21 Cl 0.4, Cs 0.15 FA 0.6MA 0.3Pb 0.5Sn 0.5I3,PbI 2, PbBr 2, and PbCl 2. The minimum slab thickness was 10 ˚ A with a minimum vacuum thickness of 10 ˚ A. All training and test data were subsequently filtered, removing any structures for which the DFT-calculated forces exceeded 50 eV/ ˚ A. 

## Construction of the domain-specific ‘D2’ dataset 

The MACE-MP-0b3 model fine-tuned on ‘hyP-26’ (‘FM →hyP-26’) was used to run NVT MD simulations (450 K, 200 ps) using the Langevin thermostat implementation in the ASE 5Calculator provided by graph-pes . Starting structures were constructed with the passivat-ing molecule [3-(2-Aminoethylamino)propyl]trimethoxysilane (AEAPTMS) coordinating to Cs 0.12 FA 0.88 PbI 0.75 Br 0.25 surface slabs via the O or N heteroatoms, respectively. The (001), (110) and (111) surface terminations were considered, using slabs of minimum 10 ˚ A with a vacuum size of 25 ˚ A along the z-axis. From each trajectory, 10 equally-spaced snapshots were selected for DFT labelling, with the exception of the larger (111) system, from which only 5 snapshots were used. Thus, 90 structures were labelled in total, with a 9:1 split between the training and test datasets. After this first iteration, two potentials were trained: the first version used the MACE-MP-0b3 

foundation model fine-tuned only on the AEAPTMS trajectory snapshots (‘FM →AEAPTMS’), and the second version was a MACE model directly-trained on the full ‘hyP-26’ dataset plus the D2 trajectory snapshots (‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’). ML-driven MD simulations were then run with more complex starting structures, which had not been included in the initial training dataset: the AEAPTMS molecule passivating the (001) surface with a Pb vacancy, halide vacancy, and FA–I vacancies, and the (110) surface with an FA vacancy. From each of the trajectories sampled with the two models, 10 evenly-spaced structures were selected for the (001) surface system, and 5 structures each for the larger (110) system. Thus, in the sec-ond iteration, an additional 70 structures were labelled, with a 9:1 split between the training and test datasets. To be able to observe the effect of the passivating molecule on the perovskite’s stability to degradation, the model must be able to drive simulations in a higher-temperature regime. To this end, temperature ramps up to 850 K were performed using the second iteration of the ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model. The heating rate was set to 2 ×10 12 K s −1 for each of the (001), (110), (111), and (200) slab systems with a passivating AEAPTMS molecule at the surface. From each of these trajectories, 15 evenly-spaced snapshots were labelled with DFT and added to the training and test datasets with a 9:1 split. The fine-tuned MACE-MP-0b3 models failed to identify the ‘N1/N2/O’ coordination type as an energy minimum, whereas this posed no difficulty for the fine-tuned MACE-MH-1 mod-els. To enable a consistent comparison of MLIP-relaxed ‘N1/N2/O’ structures across both FMs, the training dataset was augmented for all models with 15 evenly-spaced snapshots drawn from the relaxation trajectories of the molecule–surface system into four coordina-tion types (‘N1/N2/O’, ‘N2/O’, ‘N1’, and ‘O vertical’, as illustrated in Fig. 1c in the main text) and from the relaxation trajectory of the pristine surface, with relaxations performed us-ing the ‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’ model. Structural relaxations were carried out with the 

LBFGSLineSearch algorithm as implemented in ASE, using a maximum force convergence criterion of fmax = 0.075 eV ˚ A−1. For the multidentate ‘N1/N2/O’ coordination, which proved particularly challenging for the fine-tuned MACE-MP-0b3 models, an additional 74 rattled structures were included in the training data. 6The test set was expanded with 5 evenly spaced snapshots from each relaxation trajectory obtained using the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ model, supplemented by 25 snapshots drawn from a 500 ps NVT MD trajectory at 350 K. To test the performance of the MLIP on a related amino-silane passivator not included in the 

D2 dataset, namely trimethoxy[3-(methylamino)propyl]silane (MAPTMS), the ’direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’ model was used to conduct an NVT MD simulation for 500 ps at 350 K. 50 evenly-spaced snapshots were selected and labelled with the same DFT settings; these were used to test the MLIP force RMSE on an out-of-distribution system, with results shown in Fig. S4. 7Supplementary Note 3 (DFT computations) 

All DFT calculations were performed at the meta-GGA SCAN S28 level of theory, using the Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP). S29–S31 The projector augmented-wave (PAW) pseudopotentials S32,S33 used corresponded to valence-electron configurations of 4s 24p 5 for Br, 2s 22p 2 for C, 3s 23p 5 for Cl, 5s 25p 66s 1 for Cs ( Cs sv ), 1s 1 for H, 5s 25p 5 for I, 2s 22p 3

for N, 2s 22p 4 for O, 5s 25p 65d 10 6s 26p 2 for Pb ( Pb sv GW ), 3s 23p 2 for Si, 4d 10 5s 25p 2 for Sn ( Sn d ). For the single-point calculations, an energy cut-off of 600 eV was used with a stopping criterion of 1 × 10 −6 eV and a Monkhorst–Pack grid centred on Γ with a k-spacing of 0.2 ˚ A. Gaussian smearing was applied with a width of 0.05 eV. Our calculations were performed without the LASPH setting, which includes non-spherical contributions to the corrections for the gradient of the density inside the PAW spheres. S34 

As this setting was found to affect the single-point energies of related BiMO 3 perovskite systems by up to ≈ 6 meV/atom, S35 we have tested the effect of setting LASPH to True and retraining MLIPs on the thus-relabelled D2 dataset; the results are shown in Table S8. The largest difference is observed for the isolated AEAPTMS molecule: ≈6 meV/atom between the ∆E (with respect to DFT) of the MLIP trained on the dataset with LASPH turned off and that of the MLIP trained on the dataset with LASPH turned on. We checked the performance of models trained on the D2 dataset labelled with LASPH =True and found that it does not change the trend observed in Fig. 3; hence we deem the original DFT settings used for our reported results sufficient to support the message in the main text. For the geometry relaxations, the stopping criterion was decreased to 1 × 10 −5 eV for the energy and a setting of –0.075 eV/ ˚ A for EDIFFG , stopping the relaxation when the norms of all the forces are all lower than | EDIFFG |. The relaxations were started from the lowest-energy MLIP-relaxed structure for each configuration type. 8Supplementary Tables 

> 9

Table S1: Composition of the training dataset. Dataset size Training data Cells Atoms Free atoms Cs/C/H/N/Pb/Sn/Cl/Br/I 9 9Crystalline structures CsPbI 3 383 7,535 FAPbI 3 1,101 64,393 MAPbI 3 540 65,808 CsSnI 3 467 21,395 Cs xFA 1−xPbI 3 85 5,187 Cs xMA 1−xPbI 3 85 5,005 MA xFA 1−xPbI 3 85 7,202 CsPb xSn 1−xI3 33 660 CsPbBr xCl 1−x 1,721 34,420 CsPbI xBr 1−x 1,721 34,420 FAPbBr xCl 1−x 108 6,912 FAPbI xBr 1−x 189 10,392 MAPbI xBr 1−x 153 6,984 MAPbBr xCl 1−x 108 6,912 PbCl 2 43 3,216 PbBr 2 21 1,008 PbI 2 64 4,656 NPT MD snapshots Cs 0.15 FA 0.85 PbI 0.77 Br 0.23 270 24,119 Cs 0.25 FA 0.75 PbI 0.75 Br 0.21 Cl 0.4 270 22,140 Cs 0.15 FA 0.6MA 0.3Pb 0.5Sn 0.5I3 270 49,950 Random structures (hard-sphere) Random ABX 3 composition 33 6,940 Defect structures CsPbI 3 77 10,356 MAPbI 3 166 53,767 CsPbBr 3 73 9,836 CsPbCl 3 13 1,742 Surface slabs CsPbI 3 13 175 MAPbI 3 9 276 FAPbI 3 4 132 Cs 0.15 FA 0.85 PbI 0.77 Br 0.23 14 2,143 Cs 0.25 FA 0.75 PbI 0.75 Br 0.21 Cl 0.4 11 1,558 Cs 0.15 FA 0.6MA 0.3Pb 0.5Sn 0.5I3 28 7,770 PbCl 2 22 1,044 PbBr 2 9 288 PbI 2 14 546 Random structures (GAP-RSS) CsPbI 3 1,000 8,500 MAPbI 3 1,000 23,136 FAPbI 3 1,000 24,036 

Total 11,020 522,723 

10 Table S2: Phases and space groups of the main perovskite structures included in the training dataset. 

Compound Phase Space Group CsPbI 3 Cubic ( α) Pm ¯3m (221) Tetragonal ( β ) P4/mbm (127) Orthorhombic ( γ) Pnma (62) CsSnI 3 Cubic ( α) Pm ¯3m (221) Orthorhombic ( γ) Pnma (62) Tetragonal ( β ) P4/mbm (127) MAPbI 3 Cubic S36 Pm ¯3m (221) Tetragonal I4/mcm (140) Orthorhombic Pnma (62) FAPbI 3 Cubic ( α)S37 Pm ¯3m (221) Tetragonal ( β ) P4 2/mnm (136) Hexagonal ( δ ) P63mc (186) PbCl 2 Monoclinic P12 1/c1Orthorhombic Pnma (62) PbBr 2 Orthorhombic Pnma (62) PbI 2 Hexagonal P63mc (186) Trigonal R¯3m (160) Trigonal P3m1 (164) 11 Table S3: Minimum distance constraints imposed when distorting the crystalline unit cells for data augmentation. 

Bond Minimum distance C–C 1.0 ˚ AC–H 0.5 ˚ AC–I 1.9 ˚ AC–N 1.0 ˚ AC–Pb 2 ˚ AH–H 0.5 ˚ AH–I 1.4 ˚ AH–N 0.5 ˚ AH–Pb 1.4 ˚ AI–I 2.2 ˚ AI–N 1.9 ˚ AI–Pb 2.4 ˚ AN–N 1.2 ˚ AN–Pb 1.8 ˚ APb–Pb 2.4 ˚ A

Table S4: SOAP hyperparameters chosen for the GAP-RSS protocol. 

Hyperparameter 2-body 3-body SOAP 

δ 2 2 1

cutoff 5.0 3.25 5.0 

n sparse 15 100 1000 

Table S5: Energy and force RMSEs on the ‘hyP-26’ test set for the ‘FM →hyP-26’ fine-tuned models, starting from the four different pre-trained MACE foundation models. Values are rounded to two decimal places. 

‘FM →hyP-26’ model Energy RMSE (eV/atom) Force RMSE (eV/ ˚ A) 

MACE-MP-0b3 0.01 0.11 

MACE-MPA-0 0.01 0.10 

MACE-OMAT-0 0.01 0.09 

MACE-MH-1 0.01 0.07 12 Table S6: Energy and force RMSEs on the AEAPTMS ( D2 ) test set for the ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ and ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ fine-tuned models, starting from four different pre-trained MACE foun-dation models. Values are rounded to two decimal places. 

‘FM →AEAPTMS’ model Energy RMSE (eV/atom) Force RMSE (eV/ ˚ A) 

MACE-MP-0b3 0.01 0.09 

MACE-MPA-0 0.01 0.08 

MACE-OMAT-0 0.01 0.08 

MACE-MH-1 0.01 0.06 ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ model Energy RMSE (eV/atom) Force RMSE (eV/ ˚ A) 

MACE-MP-0b3 0.01 0.09 

MACE-MPA-0 0.01 0.08 

MACE-OMAT-0 0.01 0.07 

MACE-MH-1 0.01 0.05 

Table S7: Single-point energy differences between MLIP and DFT values computed with different MLIP fitting approaches using the MACE-MP-0b3 and MACE-MH-1 foundation models. Values are reported as ∆E = ⟨EMLIP ⟩ − EDFT ± σ , where σ is the standard deviation over three independent MLIP runs. All evaluated structures were relaxed using DFT. 

∆E (meV/atom) Structure Zero-shot FM FM →AEAPTMS FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS 

MACE-MP-0b3 

AEAPTMS 17.8 ± 0.0 83.4 ± 2.5 11.6 ± 1.8 Surface 43.3 ± 0.0 -12.0 ± 0.5 0.7 ± 1.0 N1 40.7 ± 0.0 3.1 ± 0.7 1.6 ± 1.0 N1/N2/O 44.5 ± 0.0 3.9 ± 0.7 2.2 ± 1.0 N2/O 43.8 ± 0.0 4.2 ± 0.7 2.4 ± 1.0 O vertical 41.1 ± 0.0 2.9 ± 0.6 1.5 ± 1.1 

MACE-MH-1 

AEAPTMS 2.7 ± 0.0 4.8 ± 2.4 8.4 ± 2.0 Surface 12.8 ± 0.0 1.0 ± 0.5 0.6 ± 0.6 N1 11.6 ± 0.0 0.4 ± 0.3 0.6 ± 0.2 N1/N2/O 13.7 ± 0.0 0.5 ± 0.3 0.7 ± 0.2 N2/O 12.5 ± 0.0 0.5 ± 0.3 0.8 ± 0.2 O vertical 10.8 ± 0.0 0.7 ± 0.3 1.0 ± 0.2 13 Table S8: Single-point energy differences between MLIP and DFT values computed with different MLIP fitting approaches using the MACE-MP-0b3 and MACE-MH-1 foundation models, comparing the effects of turning the LASPH setting in VASP off vs. on. Values are reported as ∆E = ⟨EMLIP ⟩ − EDFT ±

σ in meV/atom, where σ is the standard deviation over three independent MLIP runs. All evaluated structures were relaxed using DFT. 

FM →AEAPTMS FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS Structure w/o LASPH w/ LASPH w/o LASPH w/ LASPH MACE-MP-0b3 

AEAPTMS 83.4 ± 2.5 77.5 ± 2.7 11.6 ± 1.8 12.8 ± 1.5 Surface -12.0 ± 0.5 -13.5 ± 0.6 0.7 ± 1.0 0.4 ± 0.6 N1 3.1 ± 0.7 0.7 ± 0.8 1.6 ± 1.0 1.3 ± 0.7 N1/N2/O 3.9 ± 0.7 1.7 ± 0.8 2.2 ± 1.0 2.1 ± 0.7 N2/O 4.2 ± 0.7 1.9 ± 0.8 2.4 ± 1.0 2.2 ± 0.7 O vertical 2.9 ± 0.6 0.6 ± 0.8 1.5 ± 1.1 1.2 ± 0.7 

MACE-MH-1 

AEAPTMS 4.8 ± 2.4 6.3 ± 0.9 8.4 ± 2.0 8.6 ± 0.8 Surface 1.0 ± 0.5 0.3 ± 0.3 0.6 ± 0.6 -0.4 ± 0.4 N1 0.4 ± 0.3 -0.0 ± 0.4 0.6 ± 0.2 -0.1 ± 0.4 N1/N2/O 0.5 ± 0.3 0.3 ± 0.4 0.7 ± 0.2 0.3 ± 0.4 N2/O 0.5 ± 0.3 0.2 ± 0.4 0.8 ± 0.2 0.2 ± 0.3 O vertical 0.7 ± 0.3 0.3 ± 0.3 1.0 ± 0.2 0.2 ± 0.4 14 Table S9: Single-point energy differences between MLIP and DFT values computed with different MLIP fitting approaches using the MACE-MPA-0 and MACE-OMAT-0 foundation models. Values are reported as ∆E = ⟨EMLIP ⟩ − EDFT ± σ , where σ is the standard deviation over three independent MLIP runs. All evaluated structures were relaxed using DFT. 

∆E (meV/atom) Structure Zero-shot FM FM →AEAPTMS FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS 

MACE-MPA-0 

AEAPTMS 29.7 ± 0.0 52.5 ± 1.4 11.0 ± 0.4 Surface 0.8 ± 0.0 -8.1 ± 0.9 1.0 ± 0.5 N1 5.6 ± 0.0 2.1 ± 1.0 2.7 ± 0.4 N1/N2/O 7.7 ± 0.0 3.1 ± 1.0 3.3 ± 0.5 N2/O 7.7 ± 0.0 3.2 ± 1.0 3.6 ± 0.4 O vertical 5.6 ± 0.0 1.9 ± 0.9 2.6 ± 0.4 

MACE-OMAT-0 

AEAPTMS 66.4 ± 0.0 57.7 ± 0.3 9.8 ± 1.9 Surface 69.1 ± 0.0 -7.8 ± 1.9 1.1 ± 0.9 N1 65.3 ± 0.0 1.4 ± 1.7 1.1 ± 1.0 N1/N2/O 66.1 ± 0.0 1.3 ± 1.7 1.1 ± 1.0 N2/O 65.1 ± 0.0 1.5 ± 1.7 1.3 ± 1.0 O vertical 66.8 ± 0.0 2.6 ± 1.6 2.6 ± 0.9 

Table S10: Adsorption energies computed with ‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’. Values are reported as 

∆E = ⟨EMLIP ⟩ − EDFT ± σ , where σ is the standard deviation over three independent MLIP runs. The evaluated structures were relaxed using DFT. 

Structure direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS ∆E (meV/atom) AEAPTMS 21 ± 2.0 Surface 0.90 ± 0.12 N1/N2/O 4.5 ± 0.72 N2/O 4.6 ± 0.51 N1 3.9 ± 0.45 O vertical 3.2 ± 0.29 15 Table S11: Energy differences, ∆E, between the DFT single-point energy predictions for structures relaxed using DFT and the same structures relaxed with MLIPs for the AEAPTMS passivation test cases. Values are reported as ∆E ± σ , where σ is the standard deviation obtained from three inde-pendently trained MLIPs using different random seeds. The values are provided in eV for the whole structure, rather than per-atom energies, to allow comparison with Eads predictions for the purpose of identifying error cancellation. 

FM Structure FM →D2 ∆E (eV) FM →D1 →D2 ∆E (eV) 

MACE-MP-0b3 

N1/N2/O 1.27 ± 0.02 0.92 ± 0.19 N2/O 1.02 ± 0.16 0.87 ± 0.14 N1 0.24 ± 0.02 0.41 ± 0.05 O (vertical) 0.38 ± 0.07 0.46 ± 0.35 Surface 1.72 ± 0.03 –0.32 ± 0.15 AEAPTMS 0.01 ± 0.00 0.01 ± 0.00 

MACE-MH-1 

N1/N2/O 0.07 ± 0.01 0.24 ± 0.07 N2/O 0.19 ± 0.10 0.11 ± 0.04 N1 0.19 ± 0.2 0.14 ± 0.01 O (vertical) 0.07 ± 0.23 0.15 ± 0.07 Surface –0.09 ± 0.37 0.05 ± 0.40 AEAPTMS 0.01 ± 0.005 0.01 ± 0.01 

16 Table S12: Energy differences ∆E between the DFT single-point energy predictions for structures relaxed using DFT and the same structures relaxed with MLIPs for the D2 (AEAPTMS passivation) test dataset. Values are reported as ∆E ± σ , where σ is the standard deviation obtained from three independently trained MLIPs using different random seeds. The values are provided in eV for the whole structure, rather than per-atom energies, to allow comparison with Eads predictions for the purpose of identifying error cancellation. 

FM Structure FM →D2 ∆E (eV) FM →D1 →D2 ∆E (eV) 

MACE-MPA-0 

N1/N2/O 1.10 ± 0.18 0.70 ± 0.08 N2/O 0.67 ± 0.30 1.08 ± 0.20 N1 0.41 ± 0.17 0.35 ± 0.17 O (vertical) 0.34 ± 0.06 0.32 ± 0.03 Surface –0.11 ± 0.44 –0.51 ± 0.15 AEAPTMS 0.01 ± 0.003 0.01 ± 0.003 

MACE-OMAT-0 

N1/N2/O 0.91 ± 0.01 0.83 ± 0.08 N2/O 0.69 ± 0.26 0.18 ± 0.15 N1 0.48 ± 0.2 0.35 ± 0.05 O (vertical) 0.1 ± 0.41 0.4 ± 0.1 Surface –0.18 ± 0.31 –0.43 ± 0.01 AEAPTMS 0.01 ± 0.005 0.01 ± 0.005 

Table S13: Comparison of passivated surface systems relaxed using the different potential-fitting ap-proaches, starting from different foundation models. The SOAP similarity score reflects how similar the structure is to the corresponding ground-truth DFT-relaxed configuration (0: completely dissimi-lar; 1: identical).                                                                                   

> MACE-MP-0b3 MACE-MH-1 MACE-MPA-0 MACE-OMAT-0 Direct
> Config. →D2 →D1 →D2 zero-shot →D2 →D1 →D2 zero-shot →D2 →D1 →D2 zero-shot →D2 →D1 →D2 zero-shot D1+D2 N1/N2/O 0.807 0.840 –0.999 0.955 –0.831 0.836 –0.838 0.852 –0.828 N2/O 0.836 0.861 0.724 0.998 0.979 0.833 0.819 0.820 0.740 0.844 0.819 0.794 0.850 N1 0.912 0.905 0.768 0.999 0.982 0.875 0.870 0.884 0.781 0.878 0.884 0.780 0.884 O vertical 0.850 0.958 0.757 0.904 0.899 0.856 0.852 0.851 0.810 0.865 0.859 0.757 0.999
> Avg. 0.851 0.891 0.746 0.975 0.954 0.855 0.843 0.848 0.777 0.856 0.853 0.777 0.858

17 Supplementary Figures -4 -3 -2 Cohesive energy (eV/atom) -1 

Figure S1: The energetic spread of the ‘hyP-26’ dataset, visualised similar to Fig. 1b in the main text, but now colour-coded according to the cohesive energy of the respective structures. The two-dimensional representation of the configurational space is constructed with the UMAP algorithm S38 

based on the SOAP similarity metric, S23 showing the clustering of structurally-similar systems in-cluded in the dataset. a b

Figure S2: MLIP single-point energy predictions for the different configuration types, showing the effect of including snapshots from relaxation trajectories into the four desired configuration types (‘N1/N2/O’, ‘N2/O’, ‘N1’ and ‘O vertical’, shown in Fig. 1 in the main text). Panel a shows results for MACE-MP-0b3 -derived models, while panel b shows results for MACE-MH-1 -derived models. The directly-trained model (‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’) predictions and the DFT results are provided for reference. 

18 AEAPTMS passivation MAPbI3 defects Surfaces Training protocol          

> abcdef
> MACE-MPA-0: General task MACE-MPA-0: Specialised task MACE-OMAT-0: General task MAPbI3 defects Surfaces AEAPTMS passivation MACE-OMAT-0: Specialised task Training protocol Training protocol Training protocol Training protocol Training protocol

Figure S3: Force component RMSE relative to DFT for MLIPs trained using different fitting ap-proaches. Violin plots show errors for surface structures (‘hyP-26’ test set), MAPbI 3 defect structures (‘hyP-26’ test set), and the AEAPTMS ( D2 ) specialised test set. Panels ( a)–( c) use MACE-MPA-0 as the starting FM, while panels ( d)–( f) use MACE-OMAT-0 .MACE-MP-0b3 MACE-MH-1 a b

Figure S4: Root mean square error (RMSE) of force components predicted using the MLIPs obtained with different potential fitting approaches compared to DFT. ( a), ( b) Box plots showing RMSE on a MAPTMS specialised dataset, using MACE-MP-0b3 and MACE-MH-1 as the starting FMs, respectively. Outliers, representing data that fall outside of the upper and lower bounds of the boxplots, are shown in orange. 

19 MACE-MH-1 a 

> MACE-OMAT-0 MACE-MP-0b3
> cb
> MACE-MPA-0 d

Figure S5: The MLIPs’ performance in the prediction of Eads evaluated on DFT-relaxed structures. (a) MLIP adsorption energy predictions compared to the DFT energy predictions for the DFT-relaxed systems with coordination types ‘N1/N2/O’, ‘N2/O’, ‘N1’ and ‘O vertical’, using MACE-MP-0b3 as the starting FM. ( b) Same, but using MACE-MH-1 as the starting FM. ( c) Same, but using MACE-MPA-0 

as the starting FM. ( d) Same, but using MACE-OMAT-0 as the starting FM. 

20 N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface E ads N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface MACE-OMAT-0 MACE-MPA-0 E ads −1.5 −1 −0.5 00.5 −0.2 00.2 0.4 0.6 Energy error (eV) FM →AEAPTMS FM →hyP-26→ AEAPTMS 

Lorem ipsum Energy error (eV) N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface E ads N1/N2/O AEAPTMS Surface E ads MACE-OMAT-0 MACE-MPA-0 a bFigure S6: Waterfall plots breaking down the energy errors contributing to the MLIPs’ deviation from DFT-predicted Eads for the ‘N1/N2/O’ system. ( a) Energy errors of the ‘FM →AEAPTMS’ fine-tuning protocol when using MACE-OMAT-0 and MACE-MPA-0 as starting FMs. ( b) Same, but for the ‘FM →hyP-26 →AEAPTMS’ fine-tuning protocol. DFT singlepoint MLIP singlepoint   

> abcd

MACE-MH-1 MACE-MP-0b3 

Figure S7: The MLIPs’ performance in the relaxation of the passivated system in the expected coordi-nation types. ( a), ( b) The DFT predictions of Eads for the MLIP-relaxed structures using MACE-MP-0b3 

and MACE-MH-1 as the starting FMs, respectively. ( c), ( d) The MLIP predictions of Eads for the MLIP-relaxed structures using MACE-MP-0b3 and MACE-MH-1 as the starting FMs, respectively. 

21 MACE-OMAT-0 MACE-MPA-0 DFT singlepoint MLIP singlepoint   

> abccd

Figure S8: The MLIPs’ performance in the relaxation of the passivated system in the expected coor-dination types. Panels ( a), ( b) show the DFT predictions of Eads of the MLIP-relaxed structures using 

MACE-MPA-0 and MACE-OMAT-0 as the starting FMs, respectively. Panels ( c), ( d) show the MLIP pre-dictions of Eads of the MLIP-relaxed structures using MACE-MPA-0 and MACE-OMAT-0 as the starting FMs, respectively. MACE-MH-1 MACE-MP-0b3 a b

Figure S9: The MLIPs’ performance in the relaxation of the passivated system in the expected co-ordination types, including the zero-shot benchmarks. ( a) The DFT predictions of Eads of the MLIP-relaxed structures using MACE-MP-0b3 as the starting FM. ( b) Same, but using MACE-MH-1 as the starting FM. The zero-shot models are not able to relax the system into the ‘N1/N2/O’ coordination type, hence this structure is not shown here. 

22 0.887 0.903 0.867 0.870 Direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS Figure S10: Structural similarity of the MLIP-relaxed structures, with relaxations driven by ‘direct-hyP-26+AEAPTMS’, compared to the DFT-relaxed systems for each coordination type. Atom colors indicate their SOAP similarity to the corresponding atoms in the ground-truth DFT- relaxed configu-ration (0: completely dissimilar; 1: identical), as visualized using OVITO. S39 0.724 0.833 0.758 0.875 0.757 0.856 MACE-MP-0b3 zero-shot MACE-MH-1 zero-shot a b

Figure S11: The MLIPs’ performance in the relaxation of the passivated system in the expected co-ordination types. ( a) Structural similarity of the zero-shot MACE-MP-0b3 -relaxed structures compared to the DFT-relaxed systems for each coordination type. ( b) Same, but for the zero-shot MACE-MH-1 

FM. Atom colors indicate their SOAP similarity to the corresponding atoms in the ground-truth DFT-relaxed configuration (0: completely dissimilar; 1: identical), as visualized using OVITO. S39 The zero-shot models are not able to relax the system into the ‘N1/N2/O’ coordination type, hence this structure is not shown here. Edge-sharing polyhedra Defective polyhedron Face-sharing polyhedra 

Figure S12: Edge-sharing polyehdra in simulations with passivation coverage of 1.28 molec/nm 2, as visualized using OVITO. S39 

23 Figure S13: Simulation snapshots showing subsurface penetration of AEAPTMS molecules, as vi-sualized using OVITO. S39 The snapshots are extracted from simulations with passivation coverage values over 1 molec/nm 2.

Figure S14: Influence of passivation coverage on average N–Pb and O–Pb bond-length, with the AEAPTMS molecule binding to the undercoordinated Pb at the perovskite surface.The intermolecular distances are averaged over all contacts up to a cut-off of 3.2 ˚ A for Pb–O and 3.0 ˚ A for Pb–N. 

24 References 

S1. https://github.com/vldgroup/graph-pes .S2. Batatia, I., Kovacs, D. P., Simm, G., Ortner, C. & Csanyi, G. MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. In Koyejo, S. et al. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, 11423–11436 (2022). S3. Batatia, I. et al. Cross Learning between Electronic Structure Theories for Uni-fying Molecular, Surface, and Inorganic Crystal Foundation Force Fields (2025). arXiv:2510.25380 [physics.chem-ph]. S4. Batatia, I. et al. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry (2023). arXiv:2401.00096v1 [physics.chem-ph]. S5. Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization (2014). arXiv:1412.6980 [cs.LG]. S6. Eriksson, F., Fransson, E. & Erhart, P. The hiphive package for the extraction of high-order force constants by machine learning. Advanced Theory and Simulations 

2, 1800184 (2019). S7. Islam, M. A., Rondinelli, J. M. & Spanier, J. E. Normal mode determination of per-ovskite crystal structures with octahedral rotations: theory and applications. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 25 , 175902 (2013). S8. Oku, T. Crystal structures of perovskite halide compounds used for solar cells. Reviews on Advanced Materials Science 59 , 264–305 (2020). S9. Yin, W.-J., Shi, T. & Yan, Y. Unusual defect physics in CH 3NH 3PbI 3 perovskite solar cell absorber. Applied Physics Letters 104 , 063903 (2014). S10. Giorgi, G., Fujisawa, J.-I., Segawa, H. & Yamashita, K. Cation Role in Structural and Electronic Properties of 3D Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskites: A DFT Analysis. 

The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 118 , 12176–12183 (2014). S11. Grau-Crespo, R., Hamad, S., Catlow, C. R. A. & de Leeuw, N. H. Symmetry-adapted configurational modelling of fractional site occupancy in solids. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 19 , 256201 (2007). S12. McMeekin, D. P. et al. Crystallization Kinetics and Morphology Control of For-mamidinium–Cesium Mixed-Cation Lead Mixed-Halide Perovskite via Tunability of the Colloidal Precursor Solution. Advanced Materials 29 , 1607039 (2017). S13. Fabini, D. H. et al. Reentrant structural and optical properties and large positive thermal 25 expansion in perovskite formamidinium lead iodide. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 55 , 15392–15396 (2016). S14. Unger, E. L. et al. Chloride in lead chloride-derived organo-metal halides for perovskite-absorber solar cells. Chemistry of Materials 26 , 7158–7165 (2014). S15. Jeon, N. J. et al. Compositional engineering of perovskite materials for high-performance solar cells. Nature 517 , 476–480 (2015). S16. Chen, Q. et al. Under the spotlight: The organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite for optoelectronic applications. Nano Today 10 , 355–396 (2015). S17. Lyahovitskaya, V. et al. Formation and thermal stability of quasi-amorphous thin films. 

Physical Review B 71 , 094205 (2005). S18. Bernstein, N., Cs´ anyi, G. & Deringer, V. L. De novo exploration and self-guided learn-ing of potential-energy surfaces. npj Computational Materials 5, 99 (2019). S19. Pas ¸ca, L.-B., Liu, Y., Anker, A. S., Steier, L. & Deringer, V. L. Machine-learning-driven modelling of amorphous and polycrystalline BaZrS 3. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 13 , 35447–35454 (2025). S20. Deringer, V. L., Pickard, C. J. & Cs´ anyi, G. Data-driven learning of total and local energies in elemental boron. Physical Review Letters 120 , 156001 (2018). S21. Liu, Y. et al. An automated framework for exploring and learning potential-energy surfaces. Nature Communications 16 , 7666 (2025). S22. Bart´ ok, A. P., Payne, M. C., Kondor, R. & Cs´ anyi, G. Gaussian approximation po-tentials: The accuracy of quantum mechanics, without the electrons. Physical Review Letters 104 , 136403 (2010). S23. Bart´ ok, A. P., Kondor, R. & Cs´ anyi, G. On representing chemical environments. Phys-ical Review B 87 , 184115 (2013). S24. Zunger, A., Wei, S.-H., Ferreira, L. G. & Bernard, J. E. Special quasirandom structures. 

Physical Review Letters 65 , 353–356 (1990). S25. Gehringer, D., Fri´ ak, M. & Holec, D. Models of configurationally-complex alloys made simple. Computer Physics Communications 286 , 108664 (2023). S26. Kavanagh, S. R. et al. doped: Python toolkit for robust and repeatable charged defect supercell calculations. Journal of Open Source Software 9, 6433 (2024). S27. Ong, S. P. et al. Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source python library for materials analysis. Computational Materials Science 68 , 314–319 (2013). 26 S28. Sun, J., Ruzsinszky, A. & Perdew, J. Strongly Constrained and Appropriately Normed Semilocal Density Functional. Physical Review Letters 115 , 036402 (2015). S29. Kresse, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals. Physical Review B 47 , 558–561 (1993). S30. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨ uller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Computational Materials Science 6,15–50 (1996). S31. Kresse, G. & Furthm¨ uller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy cal-culations using a plane-wave basis set. Physical Review B 54 , 11169–11186 (1996). S32. Bl¨ ochl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Physical Review B 50 , 17953–17979 (1994). S33. Kresse, G. & Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method. Physical Review B 59 , 1758–1775 (1999). S34. https://vasp.at/wiki/LASPH (last accessed 10 June 2026). S35. Płowa´ s-Korus, I. & Kaczkowski, J. Comparative density functional studies of BiMO 3

polymorphs (M = Al, Ga, In) based on LDA, GGA, and meta-GGA functionals. New Journal of Chemistry 46 , 15381–15391 (2022). S36. Brivio, F., Walker, A. B. & Walsh, A. Structural and electronic properties of hybrid per-ovskites for high-efficiency thin-film photovoltaics from first-principles. APL Materials 

1, 042111 (2013). S37. Weller, M. T., Weber, O. J., Frost, J. M. & Walsh, A. Cubic perovskite structure of black formamidinium lead iodide, α-[HC(NH 2)2]PbI 3, at 298 K. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 6, 3209–3212 (2015). S38. McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N. & Großberger, L. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approx-imation and Projection. Journal of Open Source Software 3, 861 (2018). S39. Stukowski, A. Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO-the Open Visualization Tool. Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engi-neering 18 , 015012 (2010). 27