Title: Edge Cluster Expansion with Radial Rotary Attention for Interatomic Potentials

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10664v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:00:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Edge Cluster Expansion with Radial Rotary Attention for Interatomic Potentials 

Zemin Xu 1 2 Wenbo Xie 1 P. Hu 1

Code: https://github.com/xvzemin/tace 

Models: https://github.com/xvzemin/tace-foundations 

## Abstract 

In this paper, we provide a systematic investiga-tion of SO(2) theory to machine learning inter-atomic potentials (MLIPs) and identify the limita-tions of conventional SO(2) Linear architectures relative to SO(3) Clebsch-Gordan Tensor Prod-ucts (CGTP). Building on these insights, we pro-pose direct Cartesian construction and recur-sive Clebsch-Gordan construction of Wigner D-matrices and introduce two novel interaction building blocks. First, we propose the Edge Complex Product Basis based on General-ized Asymmetric Contraction , a new formula-tion for many-body expansion that directly con-structs higher-order interactions on edges through complex-valued equivariant multiplications. Sec-ond, we introduce Radial Rotary Complex At-tention (RRA), which enhances extrapolation per-formance and surpasses existing attention vector formulations. We also introduce several improve-ments to the Atomic Cluster Expansion module. Building on these advances, we train our mod-els on OMat24, sAlex, and MPTrj, and introduce 

TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 , which achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the Matbench Dis-covery. 

## 1. Introduction 

Equivariant machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) have become indispensable tools for molecular dynamics simulations. However, the high computational cost of the Clebsch-Gordan tensor product (CGTP) has mo-tivated the development of alternative tensor product formu-lations aimed at reducing computational complexity. Rep-resentative examples include the grid-based Gaunt Tensor 

> 1

School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China 2School of Chemistry, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. Correspondence to: Wenbo Xie 

<xiewb1@shanghaitech.edu.cn >.

Preprint. July 14, 2026. 

Product (GTP) (Luo et al., 2024), which exhibits a path-merging property that avoids the explicit evaluation of mul-tiple tensor product paths. Building upon this formulation, EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 2026) incorporates nonlinearity together with many-body interactions (Batatia et al., 2022), resulting in the SwiGLU-S 2 architecture. Despite its compu-tational efficiency, GTP inherently excludes antisymmetric interactions and introduces equivariance errors, although these limitations appear to have limited impact on practical fitting performance. The Matrix Tensor Product (Unke & Maennel, 2024) similarly exploits path merging while accel-erating computation through modified contraction schemes, providing an elegant and efficient simplification of conven-tional tensor products. By explicitly rotating features into an edge-aligned local frame, the SO(2) Linear framework not only provides a sparse implementation of CGTP operations, but also introduces a fundamentally new class of equivariant operators that go beyond conventional tensor products. This approach exhibits improved scaling behavior and enables ad-ditional operations on edges at relatively low computational cost. In contrast, irreducible Cartesian tensor products and contractions (Xu et al., 2026b;a) perform equivariant convo-lutions directly in Cartesian space and have demonstrated favorable efficiency-accuracy trade-offs at low angular de-grees. Wigner-6j Convolutions (Li et al., 2026b) further maximize the fusion of edge operations into node-level computations, resulting in highly memory-efficient convo-lutions. Finally, Vector Spherical Tensor Product (VSTP) approaches (Xie et al., 2026; Heyraud et al., 2026) combine vector spherical harmonics with tensor signals to address the missing antisymmetric interactions in grid-based methods. Among these emerging tensor product formulations, the SO(2) theory has become the most widely adopted in prac-tice. Nevertheless, the theoretical understanding of SO(2) methods remains incomplete. In particular, it is often ob-served that under the same angular resolution, SO(2)-based models exhibit lower extrapolation and accuracy than CGTP-based approaches. However, models built upon SO(2) oper-ators demonstrate superior accuracy and faster convergence on the universal MLIP (uMLIP) benchmark. Although SO(2) Linear exhibits more favorable asymptotic scaling be-havior in principle, this does not necessarily make it the pre-1arXiv:2607.10664v1 [stat.ML] 12 Jul 2026 ferred choice in practice. Beyond the aforementioned limita-tions above, practical implementations typically require two SO(2) Linear operations together with nonlinear transfor-mations applied at the edge level. This reliance on complex edge-level operations prevents the development of highly optimized, general-purpose edge-fusion libraries analogous to OpenEquivariance (Bharadwaj et al., 2025) and CuEquiv-ariance (NVIDIA, 2024), which are available for CGTP-based models. In our view, the modest accuracy gains ob-served in uMLIP do not justify the additional implementa-tion complexity and the loss of fusion opportunities intro-duced by these edge-level nonlinear operations. Conversely, if such nonlinear edge operations are omitted, the advan-tages of SO(2) Linear largely disappear, and one can simply employ CGTP directly without introducing the additional complexity of SO(2) operators. As we will demonstrate in subsequent experiments, the reduced extrapolation capability primarily arises from model-design choices rather than from the SO(2) operations themselves. In particular, an appropriate treatment of radial informa-tion enables a substantially broader model-design space without compromising extrapolation performance. By contrast, the accuracy improvements observed on the uMLIP benchmark can largely be attributed to the use of edge nonlinearities and higher edge body orders. In this work, we revisit the complex-valued nature of SO(2) equivariance. From this perspective, we analyze the de-sign principles and constraints of learnable weights under complex-valued representations and characterize the class of operations that preserve SO(2) equivariance. In the exper-imental section, we first introduce a faster and numerically more stable method for constructing Wigner-D matrices by leveraging the relationship between spherical tensors and irreducible Cartesian tensors. Next, we compare the behav-ior of uuSO(2) Linear and uvSO(2) Linear, identifying the regimes in which each formulation exhibits its respective strengths and limitations. We then investigate the impact of complex-valued weight parameterizations in SO(2) Lin-ear operators by examining three representative schemes: 

w1 , w1 w1 , and w1 w2 . Building upon the SO(2) Tensor Product, i.e., complex-valued equivariant multiplication, we introduce an edge cluster expansion (ECE) block that per-forms many-body expansions directly on edges. In this part, we further demonstrate the advantages of ECE and SO(2) operations through experiments on M-fold rotation-ally symmetric structures (Joshi et al., 2023) and k-body counterexamples (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020). In addition, we show how complex-conjugate multiplication can be used to construct an SO(2)-invariant ( m = 0 , complex-valued) from query and key representations, which naturally leads to the formulation of Radial Rotary Attention. Finally, we evaluate the proposed designs through experiments on the Matbench Discovery benchmark (Riebesell et al., 2025). 

## 2. Preliminaries 

2.1. SO(3) Irreps ↔ SO(2) Irreps 

The theoretical framework related to SO(3)/O(3) operations in machine learning was first systematically implemented in e3nn (Thomas et al., 2018; Weiler et al., 2018; Kondor et al., 2018). Concretely, an irreducible representation (ir-rep) of SO(3) is indexed by the degree ℓ and order m, and learnable features can be represented as a tensor of dimen-sion 2ℓ + 1 . In machine learning applications, an additional channel dimension c is typically introduced. Therefore, a complete SO(3) irrep is indexed by (c, ℓ, m ). In general, different values of ℓ may correspond to different numbers of channels; however, in this work, we do not explicitly distinguish between them. The concept of SO(2)-related representations was first introduced in eSCN (Passaro & Zitnick, 2023), where the authors defined the SO(2) Linear operation. Subsequently, QHNetV2 (Yu et al., 2026) further developed the theoretical framework of SO(2) for Hamilto-nian prediction tasks, introducing operations such as SO(2) Tensor Product and SO(2) Gate. The SO(2) group, which describes rotations in the plane, is abelian. Therefore, over the complex numbers, all its irreducible representations are 

1-dimensional. For SO(2) features, the action of a rotation by θ is given by multiplying features by the unit complex number eimθ , m ∈ Z,

xm 7 → eimθ xm. (1) In geometric graph neural networks, for edge-level SO(3) features, if we rotate all edges to a common reference direc-tion and apply the corresponding Wigner-D transformation to the features, the rotational degrees of freedom reduce to a single remaining angle. In this case, the features can be regarded as local SO(2) features, allowing us to apply SO(2)-related operations (from global SO(3) frame to local SO(2) frame). Similarly, by applying the transpose of the Wigner-D matrix, the features can be transformed back. 

2.2. SO(2) Operations 

In general, complex-valued SO(2) features are obtained by rotating real-valued SO(3) features. However, op-erations on SO(2) features are more naturally inter-preted from the perspective of complex numbers. In this work, all SO(3) features are treated in the real-valued representation, while all SO(2) features are in-terpreted in the complex-valued representation. In practice, we can use torch.view as complex and 

torch.view as real (Paszke et al., 2019) to convert between real-valued and complex-valued features. 

Given complex-valued weights w = w1 + iw 2 and complex-valued features xm = x+m + ix −m, complex multiplication w · xm commutes with rotations and is 

2therefore SO(2)-equivariant. Specifically, for a complex-linear map LW (xm) = W xm, we have 

LW

 eimθ xm

 = W e imθ xm = eimθ W xm = eimθ LW (xm).

(2) 

This implies that we simultaneously modulate both the magnitude and the phase of the complex-valued features. In particular, if we impose the constraint w1 = w2, this implies that we only apply a fixed phase rotation to-gether with an arbitrary magnitude transformation. If we instead constrain w2 = 0 , then the operation only modulates the magnitude while preserving the phase unchanged. We refer to these three weighting schemes for complex-valued features as w1 w2 , w1 w1 , and w1 ,respectively. SO(2) Linear. Once the embedding mechanism of complex-valued weights is understood, it becomes immedi-ately clear that the essence of the SO(2) Linear operation is to mix features with the same order m across different channels c and degrees ℓ in the complex domain. This opera-tion allows us to scalarize information with higher angular resolution, (ℓ > 0, m = 0) → (ℓ = 0 , m = 0) , thereby achieving an effect analogous to an SO(3) tensor product. See Section 3.7 for details. 

SO(2) Tensor Product Given two complex-valued SO(2) features xm1 and xm2 , their complex multiplication remains equivariant under rotations when m3 = m1 + m2 or m3 =

m1 − m2, because 

xm1 xm2 7 → ei(m1+m2)θ xm1 xm2 , (3) and 

xm1 xm2 7 → ei(m1−m2)θ xm1 xm2 , (4) where xm2 denotes the complex conjugate of xm2 . Al-though some previous work calls SO(2) Linear a “tensor product”, it is actually different from the SO(2) Tensor Prod-uct. They handle different parts of the model, and both are important. 

SO(2) Gate. Different from the SO(3) gate, where the 

ℓ = 0 , m = 0 features are used as gates, the SO(2) Gate uses the m = 0 features from all degrees ℓ as gates. This can be regarded as a special case of the SO(2) tensor product, so we do not discuss it in detail. 

2.3. Special Cases of Node-wise SO(2) Operations 

SO(2) operations are typically performed on edges, where the edge direction naturally provides a local frame. If equivalent operations could be carried out directly on node representations, additional computational savings might be achieved. One possible direction is represented by frame-averaging approaches (Lin et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2026), which construct a local reference axis from the target atom and its nearby neighboring source atoms. While such for-mulations have proven effective for Hamiltonian prediction tasks, their applicability to interatomic potentials is less clear. The selection of a particular neighbor may introduce discontinuities when the local atomic environment changes. Averaging over all neighboring atoms can alleviate this is-sue; however, the resulting formulation becomes concep-tually similar to aggregating edge-wise operations at the node level, thereby diminishing the computational benefits originally sought. A second direction originates from at-tempts to simplify Wigner-6j Convolutions (Huang et al., 2026). Wigner-6j Convolutions exploit solid harmonics and binomial expansions to separate the angular dependence of source and target atoms. Since CGTP remains computa-tionally expensive, the factorized representation enabled by solid harmonics naturally motivates the construction of local reference axes directly from atomic positions. Therefore, although node-wise SO(2) operations constitute a promising design space, a universally applicable design paradigm that generalizes across diverse architectures is still lacking. 

## 3. Results 

3.1. O(2) Irrep Notation 

Although our model is only required to be local SO(2)-equivariant, it is useful to first introduce the notation for irreducible representations of O(2). This notation will be used in the subsequent discussion of Weight Types 3.5, Edge Cluster Expansion 3.6, and Radial Rotary Attention 3.8. Under a planar reflection, complex feature is mapped to its conjugate: 

xm 7 → xm. (5) Therefore, for m > 0, the corresponding O(2) irrep is still labeled by the order m, while the special case is m = 0 .Since the rotation action is trivial, reflection can act either as +1 or −1, giving two different one-dimensional irreps: 

0e and 0o. Thus, the irreps of O(2) can be summarized as 

0e, 0o, 1m, 2m, 3m, . . . (6) where m > 0 labels two-dimensional irreps, and only the 

m = 0 case splits into even and odd parity. 

3.2. Cartesian Construction of Wigner-D Matrices 

Spherical tensors and Cartesian tensors provide two equiva-lent descriptions of three-dimensional equivariant features. A spherical tensor of degree ℓ, denoted by x(ℓ) ∈ R2ℓ+1 ,transforms under a rotation R ∈ SO(3) according to the Wigner-D matrix: 

x(ℓ)′ = D(ℓ)(R)x(ℓ). (7) In contrast, a rank-ℓ Cartesian tensor T(ℓ) ∈ R3×···× 3 trans-forms by applying the rotation matrix independently to each 3Cartesian index: 

T (ℓ)′ 

> i1··· iℓ

= X

> j1,...,j ℓ

Ri1j1 · · · Riℓjℓ T (ℓ) 

> j1··· jℓ

. (8) Here, we propose two methods for computing the Wigner-D matrix from rotation matrices. The first method is more intuitive and easier to understand, while the second provides a more efficient implementation. 

Direct Cartesian Construction. The irreducible Carte-sian tensor decomposition (ICTD) (Shao et al., 2025) pro-vides an orthonormal basis transformation between degree-ℓ

spherical tensors and rank-ℓ symmetric traceless Cartesian tensors. Let Cℓ ∈ R3ℓ×(2 ℓ+1) denote the path matrix. The spherical-to-Cartesian and Cartesian-to-spherical transfor-mations are respectively given by 

vec 



T(ℓ)

= Cℓx(ℓ), x(ℓ) = CT 

> ℓ

vec 



T(ℓ)

. (9) Applying the Cartesian rotation in Eq. (8) between the two basis transformations gives a direct construction of the Wigner-D matrix: 

D(ℓ)(R) = CT 

> ℓ

R⊗ℓCℓ. (10) 

Limitations of the Direct Cartesian Construction. Al-though Eq. (10) is numerically stable, its direct evaluation introduces a Cartesian intermediate tensor containing 3ℓ

components. When evaluated for a batch of E edges, the intermediate storage scales as O  E 3ℓ(2 ℓ + 1) . Conse-quently, the direct construction becomes increasingly expen-sive as ℓ grows, despite the final Wigner-D block containing only (2 ℓ + 1) 2 entries. 

Recursive Clebsch-Gordan Construction. We note that the path matrix itself is generated recursively by coupling a degree-one representation with a degree-(ℓ − 1) representa-tion 1 ⊗ (ℓ − 1) → ℓ. This structure allows us to avoid the explicit rank-ℓ Cartesian tensor. Let 

K(ℓ) 

> abM

= Wigner3j(1 , ℓ − 1, ℓ )abM (11) denote the fixed Clebsch-Gordan coupling coefficients, where a ∈ {1, 2, 3}, b ∈ {1, . . . , 2ℓ − 1}, and M ∈{1, . . . , 2ℓ + 1 }. Starting from 

D(0) (R) = 1 , D(1) (R) = R, (12) higher-degree Wigner-D matrices can be constructed recur-sively as 

D(ℓ) 

> M N

(R) = (2 ℓ+1) X

> a,b,c,d

K(ℓ) 

> abM

D(1)  

> ac

(R)D(ℓ−1)  

> bd

(R)K(ℓ) 

> cdN

.

(13) 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 

> max
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> rotation matrix or quaternion -> Wigner-D time (ms)  Number of Edges = 10,000, cuda, torch.float32
> TACE-Direct
> TACE-Recursive
> eSCN-Euler
> DPA4-Cayley Klein

Figure 1. Runtime comparison of different Wigner-D matrix con-struction methods from rotation matrices or quaternion. The bench-mark is performed on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU using 10000 edges, torch.float32 precision, and averages the runtime over re-peated forward evaluations. The recursive Clebsch-Gordan con-struction shows better scaling with increasing ℓmax (construct from 0 to ℓmax ) compared with other methods. 

The factor 2ℓ + 1 accounts for the normalization convention of the Wigner-3j symbols. Equation (13) is algebraically equivalent to Eq. (10) , but it avoids the exponentially large Cartesian representation. The largest intermediate tensor in the recursive contraction scales as O (E (2 ℓ − 1)(2 ℓ + 1)) 

which replaces the exponential scaling with polynomial scal-ing. Moreover, the recursive method has lower numerical error and avoids the inverse trigonometric functions and angular singularities present in the original eSCN formu-lation. It consists only of fixed-shape tensor contractions, making it suitable for specialized GPU kernels. For the asymptotic behavior of different methods, please refer to Fig 1. As shown in the figure, our method achieves the best asymptotic performance. Notably, UMA (Wood et al., 2026) and DPA4 (Li et al., 2026a) constructs the Wigner-D matri-ces using quaternions and custom operators implemented in more than 1000 lines of code. In contrast, our method requires fewer than 100 lines of code. Since the accuracy of the initial rotation matrix R is also crucial for the recursive construction, we likewise construct R from quaternions. 

3.3. SO(3) Paths and SO(2) Paths 

For SO(3) operations, we typically refer to a tuple 

(ℓin1 , ℓ in2 , ℓ out ) as a path . Each path is associated with a learnable weight parameter. The weights are defined with respect to the output degree ℓout , while the feature mixing over ℓin1 and ℓin2 is performed through a linear layer. For SO(2) operations, in this work, we refer to a tuple 

(ℓin , ℓ out , m ) as a path . Similarly, each path is associated 4Algorithm 1 Recursive Construction of Wigner-D Matrices 

Input: rotation matrices R ∈ RE×3×3, maximum degree 

L

Output: Wigner-D blocks {D(ℓ)}Lℓ=0 

Initialize D(0) ← 1

if L ≥ 1 then 

D(1) ← R

end if for ℓ = 2 to L do 

Load coefficients K(ℓ) ← Wigner3j(1 , ℓ − 1, ℓ )

Compute the next Wigner-D block by one contraction: 

D(ℓ) 

> eM N

← (2 ℓ + 1) X

> a,b,c,d

K(ℓ) 

> abM

D(1) 

> eac

D(ℓ−1)  

> ebd

K(ℓ) 

> cdN

.

end for 

Return {D(ℓ)}Lℓ=0 

with a learnable weight. 

3.4. uvSO2Linear and uuSO2Linear 

To the best of our knowledge, all existing SO(2) archi-tectures currently adopt the SO(2) Linear introduced in eSCN (Passaro & Zitnick, 2023). However, considering that this operation is intended to replace tensor products with spherical harmonics, we believe that the correspon-dence between the two is not entirely straightforward. In conventional SO(3) frameworks, radial information is typi-cally associated with the SO(3) paths arising from the uuu SO(3) tensor product, with each path receiving its own path-dependent weighting. In contrast, under the SO(2) frame-work, radial information is usually incorporated before the SO(2) Linear operation through SO(3) real multiplication or SO(2) complex multiplication where the radial weights are real-valued (i.e., with zero imaginary part). As a result, radial parameters are generally not directly constructed for each individual SO(2) path. We therefore argue that this mechanism more closely resembles uvw SO(3) tensor prod-uct, where radial dependencies cannot be incorporated di-rectly for each path due to the large number of paths. There-fore, we observe that the SO(2) Linear layer introduced in eSCN is, in essence, a fully connected linear transformation that does not rely on path-wise radial weights. By analogy with the terminology used in SO(3) tensor product, we refer to this operation as uvSO2Linear . Therefore, we argue that the truly ”equivalent“ counterpart of the uuu SO(3) tensor product should instead be uuSO2Linear . For a fair comparison, we use a single SO(2) Linear operation throughout and do not introduce any edge-wise nonlineari-ties. Under this formulation, we compare the performance of the two approaches with the same number of parameters. As shown in Table 1, uuSO2Linear achieves accuracy                                                                       

> Table 1. Comparison of the extrapolation performance of different SO(2) Linear type on the 3BPA and AcAc datasets, using CGTP as the baseline. Root mean square errors (RMSEs) are reported for energies (E) in meV and forces (F) in meV/ ˚A. The best results are highlighted in bold. Model TACE (only one SO(2) Linear layer) Dataset 3BPA AcAc Type uu uv cgtp uu uv cgtp 300K E ( ↓)3.7 4.7 3.8 1.0 1.5 1.2 F ( ↓)8.8 11.8 9.1 5.2 6.8 5.4 600K E ( ↓)9.1 15.2 10.5 5.2 5.4 5.6 F ( ↓)20.5 27.5 21.5 22.8 28.3 23.5 1200K E ( ↓)27.9 30.7 29.5 ---F ( ↓)59.0 70.4 62.0 ---dihedral E ( ↓)15.0 14.5 15.6 ---F ( ↓)18.1 22.2 20.2 ---Params (M) 5.7 5.7 5.7 4.9 4.9 4.9

and extrapolation performance comparable to those of uuu SO(3) tensor product. In contrast, uvSO2Linear , which does not directly depend on radial information, exhibits a noticeable loss in expressive power. 

Advantages and Limitations. By more effectively lever-aging radial information, uuSO2Linear offers stronger expressive power and extrapolation capabilities. How-ever, this formulation does not permit channel mixing. In contrast, uvSO2Linear allows arbitrary channel trans-formations. When sufficient training data are avail-able, the improvements in accuracy and extrapolation of-fered by uuSO2Linear may become marginal. In this regime, the arbitrary channel transformations enabled by 

uvSO2Linear can be combined with edge nonlinearities, making it more flexible from an architectural perspective. We consider uuSO2Linear important because, when de-signing operators in an SO(2) framework, a single lin-ear layer should ideally serve as a replacement for the 

uuuSO3TensorProduct . While both SO(2) Linear for-mulations are theoretically valid, using uvSO2Linear in this setting sacrifices compatibility with edge nonlineari-ties. On the other hand, introducing such nonlinearities precludes the memory-efficient optimization of fusing edge computations. 

3.5. Complex-Valued Weights Break O(2)/O(3) Equivariance and Weaken Extrapolation 

We seek to understand why complex-valued weights arise in force-field models whose inputs and outputs are both real-valued. This naturally raises the question of whether the complex phase provides meaningful modeling capacity or merely introduces redundant degrees of freedom. To inves-tigate this issue, we compare the accuracy and extrapolation 5Table 2. Comparison of the extrapolation performance of different SO(2) Linear weight types and attention mechanisms on the 3BPA dataset. Root mean square errors (RMSEs) are reported for energies (E) in meV and forces (F) in meV/ ˚A. Within each attention mechanism, the best-performing architecture is highlighted in bold. Among the three attention mechanisms, the overall best-performing one is highlighted in green. Model TACE (uvSO2Linear + SO(2)Gate + uvSO2Linear + Attention), 2 Layer, ν = 2                                                                                         

> Attention Type Radial Rotary Complex Attention EquiformerV3 Attention Vector No Attention Weight Type w1 w1 w1 w1 w2 w1 w1 w1 w1 w2 w1 w1 w1 w1 w2 300K E ( ↓)3.6 4.2 7.1 4.6 4.0 6.3 4.4 4.5 4.4
> F ( ↓)8.3 10.3 12.0 8.9 10.4 12.7 8.7 11.5 12.6 600K E ( ↓)8.6 10.7 12.9 9.9 10.0 13.4 9.6 12.3 13.5 F ( ↓)19.8 24.3 28.1 20.9 27.0 30.8 22.3 27.0 29.7 1200K E ( ↓)27.0 34.9 41.5 30.3 38.5 48.6 46.3 41.0 40.5
> F ( ↓)55.4 65.9 73.5 78.2 85.4 100.6 88.8 78.7 80.5 dihedral E ( ↓)10.2 10.7 21.0 15.0 25.0 32.2 19.4 23.6 18.4
> F ( ↓)15.1 18.4 23.7 19.5 24.2 29.4 19.7 24.0 23.9

performance of three different SO(2) weight types. The comparison is conducted under three architectures: Radial Rotary Attention, the attention-vector formulation adopted by EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 2026), and a non-attention architecture. For each architecture, the best result is high-lighted in bold in Table 2. From the results, we observe that introducing phase variations provides little benefit on this dataset. In several cases, it even leads to degradation in both accuracy and extrapolation performance. In general, complex-valued weights do not guarantee O(2) -equivariance. Taking the w1 w2 as an example, its complex weight is written as w = w1 + i w2. Under the reflection 

−I, the complex SO(2) feature xm is conjugated, namely 

(−I)xm = xm. Therefore, 

Lw(( −I)xm) = ( w1 + i w2)xm,

(−I)Lw(xm) = ( w1 − iw2)xm. (14) These two expressions are not equal unless w2 = 0 . Thus, 

w1 w2 is generally only SO(2)-equivariant, while the real-weight w1 case is compatible with O(2) reflection symmetry. This implies that, restricting the model to use only real-valued weights allows us to enforce the correct behavior by construction. In contrast, an SO(3)-equivariant model does not impose this constraint and can only rely on the training data to learn the appropriate behavior under global inversion. With sufficiently large and diverse datasets, the model may approximately learn this property from data. However, in the low-data regime, the lack of an explicit constraint becomes much more pronounced, leading to a clear performance gap. 

3.6. Generalized Symmetric Contraction and Uncoupled Edge Cluster Expansion 

The Transformer architecture has achieved tremendous suc-cess in large language models (LLMs). However, we remain cautious about its direct application to machine learning in-teratomic potentials. There are two main reasons for this. First, adopting a Transformer architecture typically requires complicated operations explicitly at the edge level. For conventional CGTP frameworks, this can become ineffi-cient and may prevent the direct use of mature operator-fusion libraries such as OpenEquivariance (Bharadwaj et al., 2025) and CuEquivariance (NVIDIA, 2024). Second, the success of models such as NequIP (Batzner et al., 2022), MACE (Batatia et al., 2022), EquFlash (Lee et al., 2025), and TACE (Xu et al., 2026b) shows that strong performance can already be achieved without graph softmax mechanisms. In light of expressive Transformer-based models such as EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 2026) and PET (Bigi et al., 2026), we believe that explicitly modeling source-target atom relationships during large-scale pretraining is at least unlikely to be harmful. Therefore, we introduce edge-level many-body interactions through an uncoupled edge clus-ter expansion (ECE). The key idea is to perform tensor contractions directly on edge features using generalized coupling coefficients. The symmetric contraction was first introduced in MACE (Batatia et al., 2022) with O(3) equiv-ariance. Here, we generalize this construction and extend it to SO(2). More broadly, the framework is not limited to SO(2) and O(3): any tensor representation equipped with Clebsch-Gordan-like coupling coefficients can be incorpo-rated into the same formulation. We write the input features in layout as x(r) ∈ RB×F ×C , where B is the batch size, F

is the feature dimension of the representation, and C is the channel dimension. For SO(2) features, l index are merged into channel dimension. 

Generalized Coupling Coefficients. Consider a represen-tation decomposed into blocks indexed by λ, where each block has dimension dλ. For O(3), λ may correspond to 

(ℓ, p ); for SO(2), λ = m. A pairwise coupling is described 6by coefficients 

Cλout  

> λ1λ2

∈ Rdλ1 ×dλ2 ×dλout . (15) More generally, a correlation order ν coupling path is de-noted as 

ην = ( λ1, λ 2, . . . , λ ν ; λout ), (16) with generalized coefficients 

Cλout  

> ην

∈ Rdλ1 ×···× dλν ×dλout . (17) These coefficients can be constructed recursively from pair-wise couplings, as in the generalized Clebsch-Gordan con-struction used by MACE (Batatia et al., 2022). This makes symmetric contraction a general algebraic operation rather than a construction specific to O(3). 

SO(2) as a Special Case. For SO(2), the representation in real basis has 

dm =

(

1, m = 0 ,

2, m > 0. (18) The allowed pairwise output frequencies follow from com-plex multiplication: 

mout = m1 + m2, mout = |m1 − m2|. (19) For example, for the sum path with m1, m 2 > 0,

(a + i b)( c + i d) = ( ac − bd ) + i( ad + bc ), (20) which gives the nonzero real basis coefficients 

C000 = 1 , C110 = −1, C011 = 1 , C101 = 1 . (21) To maintain stable output variance, we normalize the coeffi-cients: X

> a,b



Cmout 

> m1m2,abo

2

= 1 . (22) 

Limitations of Symmetric Contraction. The standard symmetric contraction repeatedly contracts the same fea-ture: 

x ⊗ x ⊗ · · · ⊗ x. (23) This has two limitations. First, symmetric contraction is not always variance stable. Even if the Clebsch-Gordan coef-ficients are normalized, repeatedly using the same feature tensor introduces correlations between different polynomial orders, such as x, x2, and x3. As a result, the variance of the summed output cannot be normalized in a straightforward manner. This effect becomes more severe for high-order expansions, large numbers of paths, or extreme local struc-tures, and may lead to unstable training. Second, symmetric features inherently admit fewer computational paths than asymmetric implementations. In addition, the symmetry of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients causes antisymmetric com-ponents to vanish automatically under O(3). Although the contributions from higher-order terms gradually decrease, and symmetric contraction may appear more intuitive, our objective is to perform a many-body expansion. Therefore, it is necessary to relax these constraints appropriately. 

Generalized Asymmetric Contraction. To relax these constraints, we introduce asymmetric contraction. The input can be a list of feature tensors 

h

x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(νmax )i

. (24) If only one tensor is provided, it is reused for all orders. If fewer than νmax tensors are provided, the last tensor is reused for the remaining orders. For a path ην , the product basis is 

B(ν)  

> b,η ν,c,o

= X

> a1,...,a ν

Cλout   

> ην,a 1··· aνoν

Y

> r=1

x(r)  

> b,λ r,c,a r

. (25) The coefficients may be shared internal weights W(ν) ∈

RNpath ,ν ×C or externally provided edge/node-dependent (non)linear weights W(ν) ∈ RB×Npath ,ν ×C . The output is accumulated as 

yb,λ,c,o =

> νmax

X

> ν=1

X 

> ην→λ

1

pNp(λ, ν )No(λ) W(ν) 

> b,η ν,c

B(ν) 

> b,η ν,c,o

,

(26) where Np(λ, ν ) is the number of paths for order ν con-tributing to output block λ, and No(λ) is the number of correlation orders contributing to λ. This keeps the out-put variance close to one when different input branches are approximately independent. We refer to the recursive al-gorithm introduced in MACE (Batatia et al., 2022) as the Horner-recursive implementation. It constructs features of successive correlation orders recursively by contracting the input features with a batched version of the generalized coupling coefficients associated with the highest correlation order. However, the size of the batched coefficient scales as F ν . Consequently, the intermediate tensors also scale as F ν , which becomes prohibitively expensive when F is large. For example, in the Cartesian representation, the fea-ture dimension at angular degree ℓ grows as 3ℓ, resulting in a total dimension of Fcart = Pℓmax  

> ℓ=0

3ℓ. This exponen-tial growth quickly makes the computation impractical and largely defeats the purpose of the recursive formulation. In contrast, the spherical representation contains 2ℓ + 1 compo-nents at each angular degree ℓ, giving a total dimension of 

Fsph = Pℓmax  

> ℓ=0

(2 ℓ + 1) = ( ℓmax + 1) 2. Under the SO(2) ba-sis, only order with m ≤ mmax or ℓmax are retained, and the corresponding dimension is FSO(2) = 1 + 2 mmax . There-fore, this approach is most suitable for node-level opera-tions, or for settings in which memory consumption is not 7Algorithm 2 Generalized Asymmetric Contraction 

Input: features {x(r)}νmax  

> r=1

, x(r) ∈ RB×F ×C , general-ized coefficients {C (ν)}, weights {W(ν)}

Output: contracted features y ∈ RB×Fout ×C

Decompose the feature dimension into representation blocks {λ}

Initialize y ← 0

for ν = 1 to νmax do for each ordered path ην = ( λ1, . . . , λ ν ; λout ) do 

Compute B(ν) 

> ην

using Cλout 

> ην

Accumulate 

yλout ← yλout + sλout ,ν W(ν) 

> ην

B(ν)

> ην

end for end for 

Merge all output blocks into RB×Fout ×C

Return y

a limiting factor, where it can provide a substantial com-putational speedup. This comparison also highlights the potential advantage of SO(2) ACE. However, as discussed below, there is currently no general node-level construction for SO(2) because of the discontinuity issue. Consequently, the Horner-recursive implementation, whose intermediate tensors scale exponentially with the correlation order, cannot be directly applied to edge-level operations. We therefore de-sign a memory-efficient algorithm, presented in Algorithm 2, which avoids materializing the full high-order intermediate tensors. This design trades computational speed for substan-tially reduced memory consumption. It is particularly well suited to ECE, where the feature dimension remains small. The use of ECE allows the edge basis to depend either on an individual source or target atom, as discussed in Section 3.7, or jointly on both the source and target atoms. Here, we fo-cus on the latter formulation. Since many-body expansions are typically implemented using channel-wise operations, all angular orders m are required to share the same number of channels. This requirement can be satisfied either by applying uvSO2Linear or padding. More specifically, given the edge-aligned source and target features, xt−1 

> j

and xt−1 

> i

,from the (t − 1) -th layer, we construct the first-order edge basis, ν=1 Etij , at the t-th layer as 

> ν=1

Etij = uvSO2Linear  xt−1 

> i

∥ xt−1

> j

 , (27) where ∥ denotes channel-wise concatenation. Besides intro-ducing complex-valued weights, we also have what appears to be an additional option: allowing the real and imaginary parts of the weight to depend separately on the source and target atoms. However, as discussed above, we believe that real-valued weights are preferable. Therefore, the greatest flexibility of ECE lies in the choice of edge-dependent real weights. 

w1

|{z} 

> source atoms

+ i w2

|{z} 

> target atoms

(28) 

Nonlinearity and Extrapolation. As one of the early in-fluential equivariant models, NequIP (Batzner et al., 2022) applies a gating operation after message aggregation. Subse-quently, BoTNet (Batatia et al., 2025) conducted an ablation study by removing the gating mechanism and other non-linear components. The results showed that comparable accuracy, and in some cases slightly improved accuracy, could be achieved without gating. Motivated by this obser-vation, subsequent models, such as MACE (Batatia et al., 2022), also avoid introducing additional nonlinear trans-formations after aggregation. In fact, as the scale of the dataset increases, the fitting capacity of purely linear models becomes limited. Therefore, nonlinear modules are necessary. However, improved accuracy should not be obtained at the cost of a substantial loss in extrapola-tion capability or by introducing unconstrained modules. Instead, appropriate nonlinearities should be incorpo-rated while preserving the model’s extrapolation perfor-mance . Accordingly, the design principle of TACE is not to perform module ablations solely based on in-distribution training accuracy. Instead, we evaluate each candidate mod-ule on the 3BPA benchmark at 1200K. Any module that increases the force RMSE beyond 65 meV/ ˚Ais excluded from the final architecture. 

Differences Between Edge/Atomic Cluster Expansion. 

Here, we discuss the differences between ECE and ACE. In a local frame, edge features ( m > 0) cannot be aggregated arbitrarily. Consequently, we cannot employ a bilinear op-eration analogous to that used in Allegro (Musaelian et al., 2023) (global SO(3) frame) to introduce an explicit aggrega-tion step before ECE (local SO(2) frame). Compared with ACE, the many-body information in ECE is represented more implicitly. Moreover, ECE is generally not applied in the first layer, since the corresponding edge features have not yet aggregated information from all neighboring atoms. The role of ECE is to increase the effective body order of the model while explicitly modeling the relationship between the source and target atoms. When combined with appro-priate nonlinearities, ECE can build nonlinear messages. The incorporation of nonlinearities in ECE follows the same procedure as in ACE and details can be found in Section 3.9. 

3.7. Angular Resolution and Body Order 

In this subsection, we analyze why Edge Cluster Expan-sion can increase angular resolution and body order, namely, whether it is complete in this sense. Specifically, we study the ability of these modules to resolve M -fold rotationally symmetric structures and whether they can increase the ef-8fective body order of the representation, and, if so, through what mechanism this increase is achieved. Joshi et al. iden-tify two key factors that are critical to the a (Joshi et al., 2023) identifies two key factors that are critical to the ac-curacy of MLIPs: the angular resolution Lmax (or, more precisely, mmax in this work) and the body order ( ν). In particular, they validate this conclusion through two exper-iments. We redesign these experiments and use them to illustrate the importance of ECE from the perspectives of global SO(2) frame and global SO(3) frame. 

Global SO(2) Frame. The first experiment compares models with different values of mmax in distinguishing 2-dimension M -fold rotationally symmetric structures with different global orientations (Joshi et al., 2023). Since the structures considered here are planar, we describe them us-ing the SO(2) group rather than the SO(3) group adopted. Moreover, we provide an explicit mathematical derivation that offers a more rigorous treatment, replacing the less for-mal discussion in the original work. Since the two structures differ only in their global orientations and are otherwise symmetric, we denote the orientation by ϕ and ignore the radial component. We directly use the edge vector ˆrij to encode angular information: specifically, we compute its azimuthal angle θk (Due to the rotational symmetry of the structure, the edges that were originally distinguished by the pair index ij can now be indexed by k), which repre-sents the angular positions of the M neighbors surrounding the central atom and construct the corresponding complex SO(2) angular features: 

xkm(ϕ) = eimθ k (ϕ) = eim(ϕ+ 2πk L ), k = 0 , . . . , M − 1.

(29) Assume that the model constructs the final representation of the central atom by directly aggregating information from its neighboring atoms: 

Am(ϕ) =  

> M−1

X

> k=0

eimθ k (ϕ) =

(

M e imϕ , m ≡ 0 (mod M ),

0, otherwise .

(30) It follows immediately that if the input angular resolution satisfies mmax < M , then the aggregated information at center atom is independent of the global orientation ϕ. More-over, applying an SO(2) Atomic Cluster Expansion after the aggregation cannot resolve this issue, because the relevant angular information has already vanished during the aggre-gation: 

Am1 (ϕ)Am2 (ϕ) = 0 , m1, m 2 < M. (31) In contrast, when the SO(2) Edge Cluster Expansion prod-uct is applied before aggregation, complex multiplication combines angular frequencies and thereby generates higher angular orders. As a result, the model can obtain representa-tions that depend on the global orientation: 

Em1 (ϕ)Em2 (ϕ)̸ = 0 , m1 + m2 = M. (32) It is worth noting that although we do not explicitly include learnable weights in the notation here, the conclusion re-mains unchanged when such weights are used. Since all features are represented in a global SO(2) frame, applying SO(2) Linear before or after aggregation is equivalent. Ac-cordingly, this experiment exposes a potential limitation of SO(2) ACE in this setting, while also highlighting the importance of SO(2) ECE, even though body order is not involved in this case. 

Global SO(3) Frame. Using the 2-body, 3-body, and 4-body counterexamples from Ref. (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020), we illustrate how ECE progressively constructs higher-body-order features. Each k-body counterexample consists of two geometric graphs that are indistinguishable under k-body scalarization. In general, without an explicit many-body expansion, a single message-passing layer is equivalent to a 2-body scalarization and therefore cannot distinguish the 

2-body counterexample. Increasing the correlation order in the many-body expansion progressively improves the completeness of the model. For an ACE-based architecture, the computation follows the pipeline: 

Convolution → Aggregation → ACE → Node Readout .

For the edge-based setting, however, additional design is required to properly test the effective body order of the model. Specifically, we use the following pipeline: 

Convolution → Aggregation → Gather → Rotate →

ECE → SO(2)Linear → Rotate Back → Edge Readout .

Using ECE also requires first aggregating the two-body scalarized information. Therefore, the pipeline up to the aggregation step is the same as in the ACE setting. How-ever, since ECE is performed on edges and under an SO(2) 

representation, additional gather, rotate, and rotate-back operations are required. It is important to note that once an SO(2) Linear operation is applied in this rotated frame, higher-order components with l > 0, m = 0 can be mixed into the scalar component with l = 0 , m = 0 . This is equiv-alent to introducing an interaction with the edge ij , thereby increasing the effective body order by one. As a result, the model becomes capable of distinguishing the 2-body counterexample. However, it should be emphasized that stacking multiple SO(2) Linear layers still does not further increase the effective body order, and therefore the model remains limited to distinguishing the 2-body counterexam-ple. The reason why SO(2) Linear is necessary in this pipeline is that channel-wise ECE alone, although capable of increasing the body order, cannot transfer the resulting 9Table 3. Results of the body-order experiments from (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020). Each k-body counterexample consists of two geo-metric graphs that cannot be distinguished by k-body scalarization. Architectures that successfully distinguish the two graphs achieve 

100% accuracy and are marked in green; otherwise, they achieve 

50% accuracy and are marked in red.                                                           

> Counterexamples from (Pozdnyakov et al., 2020) 2-body 3-body 4-body Architecture (Fig. 1(b)) (Fig. 2(f)) Edge Cluster Expansion Without SO(2) Linear no-rotate 50.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 1 50.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 2 50.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 3 50.0 50.0 50.0 One SO(2) Linear Without Edge Cluster Expansion no-rotate 50.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 1 100.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 2 100.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 3 100.0 50.0 50.0 Edge Cluster Expansion With One SO(2) Linear no-rotate 50.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 1 100.0 50.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 2 100.0 100.0 50.0 rotate + ν= 3 100.0 100.0 100.0

higher-order information into the scalar (l=0, m=0). Due to the block-diagonal structure of the Wigner-D matrices, information in the l > 0, m = 0 components cannot flow into the l = 0 , m = 0 component without an SO(2) Lin-ear mixing step. In this case, the operation only improves the angular resolution, as in the previous experiment, while the higher-order scalarized information is not incorporated into the final readout function. This motivates the pipeline design described above. Therefore, since the SO(2) Linear operation introduces exactly one additional effective body order, the results in Table 3 should be interpreted carefully. Finally, in our experiments, the SO(2) Linear operation is implemented as a special case that permutes the components 

l > 0, m = 0 with scalar component l = 0 , m = 0 . As shown in Table 3, ECE indeed increases the effective body order, thereby demonstrating its effectiveness and complete-ness in distinguishing higher-body-order geometric struc-tures. 

3.8. Radial Rotary Complex Attention 

We argue that geometric graphs are inherently weighted by radial information. Discarding this information and re-lying solely on simple QK inner products or contractions with attention vectors may impair the model’s extrapola-tion capability. Ideally, attention should explicitly depend on both the similarity between nodes and their relative dis-tances. Drawing inspiration from Rotary Position Embed-dings (RoPE) (Su et al., 2023), we propose Radial Rotary Complex Attention (RRA). Given the complex-valued na-ture of SO(2) representations, we define the QK similarity as the real part (0e) of the complex inner product. We discard the imaginary component because it transforms as 

0o. We further introduce a phase term and a bias term, which directly modulate the QK inner product as a scale and a shift, respectively. Notably, although the scale term is, in principle, allowed to be complex-valued, using a complex-valued phase term restricts the model to SO(2) equivariance in the local frame and breaks O(2) equivari-ance. In contrast to the weights in SO(2) Linear layers, we observe that the use of a complex-valued phase term does not affect model extrapolation and accuracy . We de-note SO(2) features in local frame as xij j,m,h,c and xij i,m,h,c ,respectively, where m is the SO(2) order, h denotes the attention head and c denotes the channel within each head. 

The complex query, key, and value features are obtained using independent uvSO2Linear with weight type w1 ,respectively. Notably, the phase term and bias shift are deliberately designed as zero-initialized linear mappings that depend only on radial basis. We intentionally ex-clude element information from these two terms, so that they encode purely distance-dependent effects. Element-dependent feature similarity is instead captured through the complex inner product. 

Qij m,h,c = uvSO2Linear 



xij i,m,h,c 



,

Kij m,h,c = uvSO2Linear 



xij j,m,h,c 



,

Vij m,h,c = uvSO2Linear 



xij i,m,h,c , xij j,m,h,c 



.

(33) The attention logit is defined as: 

sij h = bij h + τh

√D

> mmax

X

> m=0

X

> c

Re 

h

eiθh Qij m,h,c Kij m,h,c 

i

. (34) In particular, we define radial phase θh, radial bias bh and and temperature τh as: 

θm,h (r) = 0 or mπ · tanh bh + X

> n

W nh jn 

> 0

(r)

!

, (35) 

bh(r) = bh + X

> n

W nh jn 

> 0

(r), (36) 

τh = τmin + τmax − τmin 

1 + e−wh

. (37) where W and b represent the learnable weight and bias, re-spectively, n represent the number of radial basis. Here, 

Re( ·) denotes the real-part operator. The optional tempera-ture term τh controls the sensitivity of the softmax function across different attention heads. In practice, we typically set 

τmin = 0 .25 and τmax = 4 .0. The attention weight for each head is then computed over all incoming edges of node i.Meanwhile, an envelope function is incorporated to imporve the discontinuity issue reported in EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 10 2026), 

αij h =exp 



sij h



· fcut (rij )

P  

> k∈N (i)

exp  sik h

 · fcut (rik ) . (38) To examine the effect of RRA, we compare different atten-tion mechanisms, with the results summarized in Table 2. The best results are highlighted in green . Notably, even when using uvSO2Linear , which may compromise ex-trapolation performance, our model still achieves strong results. This suggests that the strong inductive bias intro-duced by RRA can effectively compensate for this limitation, thereby supporting our claim. 

3.9. Coupled Atomic Cluster Expansion. 

We still adopt the original coupled ACE implementation used in the Cartesian TACE. Specifically, “coupled” means that, after the tensor product, element-dependent weights are applied to couple information across all channels. In practice, using only 48 -64 channels is sufficient to achieve an accuracy comparable to that obtained by the uncoupled implementation with 128 -256 channels. However, its limita-tions are also evident. First, the element-dependent param-eterization introduces a large number of weights. Second, when the number of channels exceeds 64 , the coupled for-mulation leads to unnecessary computational and memory overhead. Therefore, we improve the ACE implementation mainly in two aspects. First, we make coupled ACE fea-sible when increasing the channel dimension. Second, we introduce additional nonlinearities without destroying the resulting many-body structure. 

From Dense Linear to Group Linear. Unlike standard sparse Mixture-of-Experts models (Jiang et al., 2024), where each selected expert is still a linear transformation over all input channels and using top-k selection, our goal is to keep computation feasible as the number of channels increases. Therefore, such a MoE formulation does not directly address our problem. Instead, we uniformly partition the input and output channels into E element-aware expert groups, so that each expert only operates on a subset of channels. To compensate for the reduced cross-channel communication, we additionally introduce an element-agnostic shared expert that couples all channels, 



W(z)1 0 · · · 00 W(z)2 · · · 0

... ... . . . ...

0 0 · · · W(z)

> E

| {z }

> aware group experts

+ Wshared 

| {z }

> agnostic shared expert

. (39) Here, W denotes learnable weights, and z denotes the ele-ment type on which the group-expert weights depend. 

GLU-style implementation and Nonlinear Coefficients. 

To introduce additional nonlinearity into the product ba-sis block without disrupting its many-body structure, we adopt an EquflashV2-inspired strategy, in which scalar 0e features are used to parameterize the tensor product weights (Dauphin et al., 2017; SamsungDS, 2026). An lin-ear projection first generates two asymmetric atomic bases together with scalar, feature-dependent ACE coefficients: 

Linear up (Ai) = A 0ei ⊕ Anode  

> i

⊕ Abase  

> i

, (40) where both Anode  

> i

and Abase  

> i

contain all retained irreps, including their 0e components. The first-order correlation is defined directly by the node features, while the second-order correlation is obtained by coupling them with the base features augmented by a constant scalar: 

B(1)  

> i

= Anode  

> i

(41) 

B(2)  

> i

= Anode  

> i

⊗SO(3) 

 10e ⊕ Abase 

> i

| {z } 

> modulated by SiLU

(A0ei )

. (42) The constant scalar 10e and the base features are used to approximately produce second- and third-order correlations, respectively, despite involving only a single tensor-product operation. The resulting correlation features are then con-catenated by Bi = B(1)  

> i

⊕ B(2)  

> i

. Finally, the grouped and shared experts are combined using 

Linear group (Bi) + Linear shared (Bi)

√2 . (43) 

3.10. Residual Network and Layer Norm 

In equivariant networks, an important detail is that the first layer in the message-passing process differs from subse-quent layers. During the first edge-level tensor-product operation, the tensor product is typically formed between 0e features (such as element embedding) and spherical har-monics. Consequently, prior to the first message-passing step, only scalar information is available. Under such cir-cumstances, directly treating the 0e featrues as residual connections (He et al., 2016) is generally unfavorable. We further observed that, in the absence of the LayerNorm layer, employing two residual connections independently in both the interaction module ( A basis) and the product module (B basis) does not yield optimal performance in our frame-work. Moreover, this design becomes more sensitive to the number of layers and is more prone to training instability. Instead, superior accuracy is consistently achieved when only a single residual pathway is used. In particular, both the A → B and B → B connection schemes outperform the B → A → B design, regardless of whether the identity branch is implemented through direct addition or (element-dependent) linear transformations. We also note that re-cently proposed residual-network designs, such as Attention 11 Residuals (AttnRes) (Team et al., 2026), have been shown to further improve model accuracy. However, since the depth of current uMLIPs remain substantially smaller than that of modern LLMs, the benefits brought by such residual formu-lations are comparatively limited. Therefore, although these approaches may provide additional accuracy gains, we do not adopt them in the present work in order to reduce com-putational overhead. We also observed that, compared with non-ACE architectures, ACE-based models are generally more sensitive to outliers and tend to exhibit greater training instability when multiple layers are stacked. To address this issue, we adopt the EquivariantMergeLayerNorm 

implementation introduced in EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 2026). In our view, this normalization strategy currently provides one of the most effective solutions for equivariant architectures, as it preserves the scale differences across different irreps while improving training stability. Follow-ing the same considerations applied to the residual design, we omit LayerNorm in the first layer and do not apply it after the final layer. This is because LayerNorm is primarily used to stabilize training, whereas an additional normaliza-tion at the output stage of MLIPs may limit the model’s expressive accuracy. Hence, unless the training process is highly unstable, introducing LayerNorm after the final layer is unnecessary. 

3.11. Effects of Optimizers on Model Extrapolation 

Recently, emerging optimizers such as Muon (Liu et al., 2025) and SOAP (Vyas et al., 2025) have attracted in-creasing attention as potential alternatives to conventional optimizers such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) and AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019). For example, Harari et al. (Harari et al., 2026) systematically investigated SOAP and Muon and showed that both optimizers, whether used individually or in combination, consistently achieved higher accuracy. Similarly, DPA-4 (Zeng et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026a) employed the Muon optimizer and demonstrated strong performance on the MPtrj dataset. These emerging optimizers often provide improved in-domain accuracy and faster convergence. Nevertheless, we emphasize that these optimizers should be used with caution, as both Muon and SOAP may compromise extrapolation performance to some extent. In terms of extrapolation capability, Adam performs best, followed by SOAP and then Muon. 

3.12. Matbench Discovery 

Matbench Discovery (Riebesell et al., 2025) has become a widely used benchmark for evaluating foundation mod-els in materials science. In particular, OMat24, sAlex, and MPtrj (Deng et al., 2023; Schmidt et al., 2024; Barros-Luque et al., 2026) are among the most advanced and widely used materials datasets currently available. We therefore train our model on these datasets to demonstrate its representational capacity. As shown in Table 4, our model achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance among compared architectures. Notably, among the three most important metrics, F1 score for crystal stability prediction, thermal conductivity predic-tion, and structure optimization, our model achieved the best performance on two tasks and ranked second on the remaining one, resulting in the highest overall score. 

Table 4. Top models on MatBench Discovery (Riebesell et al., 2025). For models with the same architecture, we retain only the variant with the highest accuracy. CPS is a weighted combina-tion of the F1 score, thermal-conductivity metric ( κSRME), and RMSD, and thus represents the model with the strongest overall performance. Full results are provided in Appendix Table 7.                                                                                 

> Model CPS F1( ↑)κSRME ( ↓)RMSD Params TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 0.908 0.929 0.093 0.058 222M EquFlashV2 0.907 0.929 0.094 0.058 44.9M EquiformerV3+DeNS-OAM 0.902 0.931 0.118 0.060 30.3M GRACE-3L-OAM-L 0.900 0.925 0.121 0.058 42.1M PET-OAM-XL 0.898 0.924 0.119 0.060 730M TACE-OAM-L 0.889 0.910 0.126 0.061 82.9M eSEN-30M-OAM 0.888 0.925 0.170 0.061 30.2M EquFlash 0.888 0.919 0.158 0.060 28.7M Nequip-OAM-XL 0.886 0.906 0.125 0.063 32.1M MatRIS-10M-OAM 0.877 0.921 0.218 0.060 10.4M SevenNet-Omni-i12 0.873 0.906 0.192 0.062 54.9M GRACE-2L-OAM-L 0.865 0.883 0.169 0.064 26.4M ORB v3 0.860 0.905 0.210 0.075 25.5M DPA-4.0.1-Pro-MPtrj 0.840 0.857 0.211 0.069 22.8M Allegro-OAM-L 0.840 0.895 0.319 0.065 9.7M

3.13. Model Speed 

We are pleased to see the emergence of systematic evalu-ations of both the accuracy and computational efficiency of uMLIPs, as these benchmarks provide valuable guid-ance for the community when selecting models across a wide range of model sizes (Gawkowski et al., 2026). Nev-ertheless, we would like to emphasize an important point. Improving both model extrapolation and fitting accuracy remains essential (see Section 3.6). A more expressive ar-chitecture can achieve accuracy with a smaller and faster model, while its highest-accuracy variant can also serve as an effective teacher for knowledge distillation. In prac-tice, smaller variants of SOTA architectures can therefore offer a better combination of accuracy and speed, since increasing model size often yields only marginal improve-ments on accuracy-oriented benchmarks. Existing speed benchmarks do not always evaluate models under their opti-mal configurations. In some cases, appropriate acceleration techniques may not be enabled because of limited famil-iarity with the model implementation. To provide a fairer and more representative comparison, we benchmarked the top three models (Liao et al., 2026; SamsungDS, 2026) on Matbench Discovery using the best available configuration for each model and compared their practical runtime per-formance. As shown in Table 5, the top three models are ranked in terms of computational speed and memory effi-ciency as follows: EquflashV2 > TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 >

12 EquiformerV3+DeNS-OAM. This result is consistent with our expectations. As discussed previously, architectures based on SO(2) should employ uuSO2Linear to enable operator fusion. In comparison, EquflashV2 adopts more efficient SO(3) edge-fused operators, resulting in improved computational performance. Nevertheless, SO(2) architec-tures may still offer a higher performance ceiling and more favorable scaling behavior. We therefore look forward to further developments in efficient SO(2) kernel.                       

> Table 5. This table reports the molecular dynamics simulation speed (float32), measured in ps/day ( ↑), for top-3 models (CPS) on Matbench Discovery using ASE (Larsen et al., 2017) as the simulation engine. The comparison is performed using a single NVIDIA A800 80GB PCIe GPU. Atoms TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 EquflashV2 EquiformerV3+DeNS-OAM 384 144 285 92 768 77 255 OOM 960 62 240 OOM 1152 OOM 210 OOM 3264 OOM 83 OOM 3456 OOM OOM OOM

## 4. Discussion, Limitations, and Outlook 

4.1. Diatomic Benchmark 

We also observed several interesting phenomena in the di-atomic benchmark. The widely used OAM-family datasets exhibit discontinuities in their potential energy surfaces when O or F occurs with certain transition-metal elements, due to the use of different Hubbard U treatments (Warford et al., 2026). In addition, OrbV3 (Rhodes et al., 2025) also reported that the rattle subset of OMat24 can adversely af-fect performance on diatomic benchmarks. Indeed, the top 3 models on Matbench Discovery, including TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0, EquFlashV2, and EquiformerV3+DeNS-OAM consistently exhibit relatively poor performance on the di-atomic benchmark. By contrast, models with lower fitting capacity, such as TACE-OAM-L, NequIP-OAM-XL, and MACE-MPA-0, tend to perform better on this benchmark. We attribute this behavior primarily to limitations in the training data: as model capacity and fitting accuracy in-crease, the model becomes more likely to fit dataset-specific artifacts and unphysical features, thereby reducing its ro-bustness in regimes such as diatomic configurations. In summary, we systematically review, consolidate, and extend SO(2) theory for machine learning interatomic po-tentials, while validating several implementation details that are important in practice. We further introduce Cartesian direct and recursive Wigner-D constructions, Edge Cluster Expansion (ECE), and Radial Rotary Complex Attention (RRA), and release a SOTA materials foundation model built upon these components. Our results suggest that the proposed design choices provide complementary benefits rather than a universally optimal configuration. When pur-suing the highest accuracy in large-scale pretraining, ECE with edge nonlinearities and RRA provides the most ef-fective strategy. When memory efficiency is the primary concern, uuSO2Linear is generally preferable because of its stronger inductive bias, expressive capability, and com-patibility with operator fusion. From an architectural per-spective, an important direction for future work is operator fusion for single-layer SO(2) Linear operators. During the course of this work, we also confirmed several limitations in the existing datasets, including data redundancy, inconsis-tent DFT parameter settings, and inappropriate treatments of Hubbard U corrections. For example, TACE-OAM-L, an intermediate model developed during the construction of our SO(2) model family, was trained on only approximately random 20% of the training data due to a code bug. Despite this substantial reduction in training data, it still exhibited remarkably strong performance. 

## Author contribution 

W.X. and P.H. conceived the project and guided the research. Z.X. prepared code, equations, figures and tables. All au-thors edited and revised the manuscript. 

## Acknowledgment 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China NSFC (22433004 and 22403064), the open research fund of Key Laboratory of Precision and Intelligent Chemistry, and ShanghaiTech University. We are also grateful for the computing time provided by the the HPC Platform of ShanghaiTech University. 

## References 

Barros-Luque, L., Shuaibi, M., Fu, X., Wood, B. M., Dzamba, M., Gao, M., Rizvi, A., Uyttendaele, M., Zit-nick, C. L., and Ulissi, Z. W. The open materials 2024 (omat24) inorganic materials dataset and models. Nature Computational Science , pp. 1–11, 2026. Batatia, I., Kovacs, D. P., Simm, G., Ortner, C., and Csanyi, G. Mace: Higher order equivariant message passing neu-ral networks for fast and accurate force fields. In Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K., and Oh, A. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 35, pp. 11423–11436. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. Batatia, I., Batzner, S., Kov ´acs, D. P., Musaelian, A., Simm, G. N., Drautz, R., Ortner, C., Kozinsky, B., and Cs ´anyi, G. The design space of e (3)-equivariant atom-centred 13 interatomic potentials. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7(1): 56–67, 2025. Batzner, S., Musaelian, A., Sun, L., Geiger, M., Mailoa, J. P., Kornbluth, M., Molinari, N., Smidt, T. E., and Kozinsky, B. E (3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature communications , 13(1):2453, 2022. Bharadwaj, V., Glover, A., Bulu c¸ , A., and Demmel, J. An efficient sparse kernel generator for o (3)-equivariant deep networks. In 2025 Proceedings of the Conference on Applied and Computational Discrete Algorithms (ACDA) ,pp. 32–46. SIAM, 2025. Bigi, F., Pegolo, P., Mazitov, A., and Ceriotti, M. Pushing the limits of unconstrained machine-learned interatomic potentials, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2601.16195 .Dauphin, Y. N., Fan, A., Auli, M., and Grangier, D. Lan-guage modeling with gated convolutional networks. In Precup, D. and Teh, Y. W. (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , pp. 933–941. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL 

https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/da uphin17a.html .Deng, B., Zhong, P., Jun, K., Riebesell, J., Han, K., Bartel, C. J., and Ceder, G. Chgnet as a pretrained universal neural network potential for charge-informed atomistic modelling. Nature Machine Intelligence , 5(9):1031–1041, 2023. Gawkowski, M. J., Artrith, N., Bonfanti, S., Gangan, A. S., Heenen, H. H., Kioseoglou, J., Lon ˇcari ´c, I., Myneni, H., Riebesell, J., Rossi, M., Rupp, M., Schmidt, J., Sharma, S., Shi, B. X., Wadowski, A., H ¨ormann, L., and Kapil, V. Dyna-mat: End-to-end benchmarking of foundation machine learning interatomic potentials in finite-temperature ensembles, 2026. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2607.03433 .Harari, G., Zimmermann, Y., Kulseng, O. T., Zichi, L., Tan, C. W., Descoteaux, M. L., and Kozinsky, B. Beyond adam: Soap and muon for faster, label-efficient training of machine learning interatomic potentials, 2026. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.02499 .He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep residual learn-ing for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 770–778, 2016. Heyraud, V., Weller-Davies, Z., and Tilly, J. Integral for-mulas for vector signal tensor products, 2026. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.08630 .Huang, G., Sun, Y., Liu, Z., Sedra, D., and Weinberger, K. Deep networks with stochastic depth, 2016. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09382 .Huang, L., Huang, C., Wang, Z., Du, Y., Wang, C., Lu, H., Li, Y., Liu, X., Jiang, A., and Zhang, J. E2former-v2: On-the-fly equivariant attention with linear activation memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16622 , 2026. Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A., Roux, A., Mensch, A., Savary, B., Bamford, C., Chaplot, D. S., de las Casas, D., Hanna, E. B., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G., Bour, G., Lample, G., Lavaud, L. R., Saulnier, L., Lachaux, M.-A., Stock, P., Subramanian, S., Yang, S., Antoniak, S., Scao, T. L., Gervet, T., Lavril, T., Wang, T., Lacroix, T., and Sayed, W. E. Mixtral of experts, 2024. URL https://arxi v.org/abs/2401.04088 .Joshi, C. K., Bodnar, C., Mathis, S. V., Cohen, T., and Lio, P. On the expressive power of geometric graph neural networks. 2023. URL https://openreview.net /forum?id=Rkxj1GXn9_ .Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/ab s/1412.6980 .Kondor, R., Lin, Z., and Trivedi, S. Clebsch–gordan nets: a fully fourier space spherical convolutional neural network. In Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. Larsen, A. H., Mortensen, J. J., Blomqvist, J., Castelli, I. E., Christensen, R., Dułak, M., Friis, J., Groves, M. N., Hammer, B., Hargus, C., et al. The atomic simulation environment—a python library for working with atoms. 

Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter , 29(27):273002, 2017. Lee, S. Y., Kim, H., Park, Y., Jeong, D., Han, S., Park, Y., and Lee, J. W. FlashTP: Fused, sparsity-aware ten-sor product for machine learning interatomic potentials. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. URL https://openreview.net /forum?id=wiQe95BPaB .Li, T., Li, W., Peng, A., Xue, J., Zhang, L., Zhang, D., and Wang, H. Dpa4: Pushing the accuracy-cost frontier of interatomic potentials with emfa so(2) convolution, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.02419 .Li, Y., Huang, L., Ding, Z., Wei, X., Wang, C., Yang, H., Wang, Z., Liu, C., Shi, Y., Jin, P., Qin, T., Gerstein, M., and Zhang, J. E2former: An efficient and equivariant transformer with linear-scaling tensor products. In The 

14 Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026b. URL https://openre view.net/forum?id=ls5L4IMEwt .Liao, Y.-L., Smidt, T., Shuaibi, M., and Das, A. Gen-eralizing denoising to non-equilibrium structures im-proves equivariant force fields, 2024. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2403.09549 .Liao, Y.-L., Hoffman, A. J., Shen, S. C., Duval, A., Nor-wood, S. W., and Smidt, T. Equiformerv3: Scaling ef-ficient, expressive, and general se (3)-equivariant graph attention transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.09130 ,2026. Lin, Y., Helwig, J., Gui, S., and Ji, S. Equivariance via min-imal frame averaging for more symmetries and efficiency. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 2024. URL https://openreview.net/for um?id=guFsTBXsov .Liu, J., Su, J., Yao, X., Jiang, Z., Lai, G., Du, Y., Qin, Y., Xu, W., Lu, E., Yan, J., Chen, Y., Zheng, H., Liu, Y., Liu, S., Yin, B., He, W., Zhu, H., Wang, Y., Wang, J., Dong, M., Zhang, Z., Kang, Y., Zhang, H., Xu, X., Zhang, Y., Wu, Y., Zhou, X., and Yang, Z. Muon is scalable for llm training, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2502.16982 .Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay regu-larization, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1711.05101 .Luo, S., Chen, T., and Krishnapriyan, A. S. Enabling effi-cient equivariant operations in the fourier basis via gaunt tensor products. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2024. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=mhyQXJ6JsK .Musaelian, A., Batzner, S., Johansson, A., Sun, L., Owen, C. J., Kornbluth, M., and Kozinsky, B. Learning local equivariant representations for large-scale atomistic dy-namics. Nature Communications , 14(1):579, 2023. NVIDIA. cuequivariance, 2024. URL https://gith ub.com/NVIDIA/cuEquivariance .Passaro, S. and Zitnick, C. L. Reducing so (3) convolu-tions to so (2) for efficient equivariant gnns. In Interna-tional conference on machine learning , pp. 27420–27438. PMLR, 2023. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Pozdnyakov, S. N., Willatt, M. J., Bart ´ok, A. P., Ortner, C., Cs ´anyi, G., and Ceriotti, M. Incompleteness of atomic structure representations. Physical Review Letters , 125 (16):166001, 2020. Rhodes, B., Vandenhaute, S., ˇSimkus, V., Gin, J., Godwin, J., Duignan, T., and Neumann, M. Orb-v3: atomistic simulation at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06231 ,2025. Riebesell, J., Goodall, R. E., Benner, P., Chiang, Y., Deng, B., Ceder, G., Asta, M., Lee, A. A., Jain, A., and Persson, K. A. A framework to evaluate machine learning crystal stability predictions. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7(6): 836–847, 2025. SamsungDS. Equflashv2, 2026. URL https://github .com/SamsungDS/GGNN .Schmidt, J., Cerqueira, T. F., Romero, A. H., Loew, A., J ¨ager, F., Wang, H.-C., Botti, S., and Marques, M. A. Improving machine-learning models in materials science through large datasets. Materials Today Physics , 48: 101560, 2024. Shao, S., Li, Y., Lin, Z., and Cui, Q. High-rank irreducible cartesian tensor decomposition and bases of equivariant spaces. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(175): 1–53, 2025. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v2 6/25-0134.html .Su, J., Lu, Y., Pan, S., Murtadha, A., Wen, B., and Liu, Y. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/ab s/2104.09864 .Team, K., Chen, G., Zhang, Y., Su, J., Xu, W., Pan, S., Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, G., Yin, B., et al. Attention residuals. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15031 , 2026. Thomas, N., Smidt, T., Kearnes, S., Yang, L., Li, L., Kohlhoff, K., and Riley, P. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08219 , 2018. Unke, O. T. and Maennel, H. E3x : E(3) -equivariant deep learning made easy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07595 ,2024. Vyas, N., Morwani, D., Zhao, R., Kwun, M., Shapira, I., Brandfonbrener, D., Janson, L., and Kakade, S. Soap: Improving and stabilizing shampoo using adam, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.11321 .Warford, T., Thiemann, F. L., and Cs ´anyi, G. Better without u: Impact of selective hubbard u correction on founda-tional mlips, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/ab s/2601.21056 .15 Weiler, M., Geiger, M., Welling, M., Boomsma, W., and Cohen, T. S. 3d steerable cnns: Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. In Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Grauman, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. Wood, B. M., Dzamba, M., Fu, X., Gao, M., Shuaibi, M., Barroso-Luque, L., Abdelmaqsoud, K., Gharakhanyan, V., Kitchin, J. R., Levine, D. S., Michel, K., Sriram, A., Cohen, T., Das, A., Rizvi, A., Sahoo, S. J., Ulissi, Z. W., and Zitnick, C. L. Uma: A family of universal models for atoms, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2506.23971 .Xie, Y., Daigavane, A., Kotak, M., and Smidt, T. Asymp-totically fast clebsch-gordan tensor products with vector spherical harmonics, 2026. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2602.21466 .Xu, Z., Wu, C., Xie, W., and Hu, P. A cartesian-3j frame-work for machine learning interatomic potentials, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.16882 .Xu, Z., Xie, W., and Hu, P. Spectral/spatial tensor atomic cluster expansion with universal embeddings in cartesian space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14961 , 2026b. Yu, H., Lin, Y., Zhang, X., Qian, X., and Ji, S. Efficient prediction of so(3)-equivariant hamiltonian matrices via so(2) local frames. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09398 ,2026. Zeng, J., Zhang, D., Peng, A., Zhang, X., He, S., Wang, Y., Liu, X., Bi, H., Li, Y., Cai, C., et al. Deepmd-kit v3: a multiple-backend framework for machine learning potentials. Journal of chemical theory and computation ,21(9):4375–4385, 2025. 16 A. Training Details 

All TECE models were trained in torch.float32 precision using 32 NVIDIA H20 GPUs. During pretraining, we employed DeNS (Liao et al., 2024)and stochastic depth (Huang et al., 2016) as additional regularization techniques. DeNS was mainly used with the direct model to accelerate convergence, rather than to improve the final accuracy. With appropriately chosen hyperparameters, the direct and conservative models achieved comparable performance upon convergence. The DeNS hyperparameters were kept consistent with those used in EquiformerV3 (Liao et al., 2026). For optimization, we used the Muon optimizer implemented in DeepMD-kit (Liu et al., 2025; Zeng et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026a) to accelerate convergence. Muon is not essential. In fact, AdamW may be a better choice because it generally provides better extrapolation performance. However, considering the computational cost, we used Muon to accelerate convergence. Training the TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 model consumed approximately 7680 NVIDIA H20 GPU-hours in total. This figure should not be interpreted as representative of the intrinsic computational efficiency of the TACE/TECE architecture, which achieves SOTA accuracy and computational performance. The computing platform used in our experiments exhibited suboptimal multi-GPU scaling and relied on outdated CUDA and PyTorch versions, preventing us from using compilation-based acceleration techniques. Consequently, the observed training cost was approximately three times higher than necessary. To provide a more representative evaluation, we benchmarked the computational performance of various TACE architectures on a newer platform. Further details on computational efficiency and inference speed are provided in the main text.  

> Table 6. Hyperparameters used to train the TECE-OAM-RRA model series.

Stage Direct Pre-training Conservative Pre-training Fine-tuning Training Set OMat24 OMat24 sAlex+8*MPtrj Optimizer Muon Muon Muon Learning rate scheduling WarmupStableDecay WarmupStableDecay WarmupStableDecay Number of Epoch 1 2 2Warmup Ratio 10% 5% 5% 

Stable Ratio 90% 45% 45% 

Decay Ratio 0 50% 50% 

Stochastic Weight Averaging False False True Maximum learning rate 5 × 10 −3 3 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −4

Minimum learning rate - 3 × 10 −6 1 × 10 −6

Batch size 512 512 256 

Weight decay 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3 1 × 10 −3

Loss coefficient 1/1/1 1/1/1 1/1/1 Loss Type MAE/L2MAE/MAE MAE/L2MAE/MAE MAE/L2MAE/MAE Gradient clipping norm threshold 100 100 100 

Model EMA decay 0.999 0.999 0.999 

DeNS True False False Stochastic Depth 0.05 0 0Cutoff radius ( ˚ A) 6 6 6

Number of layers 8 8 8

Interaction channel 64 64 64 

Product channel 256 256 256 

Lmax 4 4 4

ℓmax 4 4 4

mmax 4 4 4

ℓ1ℓ2 ≤ ≤ ≤

m1m2 ≥ ≥ ≥

Correlation order 2 2 2

17 B. Matbench Discovery 

Table 7. Unique Prototypes entries in Matbench Discovery at the time of uploading TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0. Model CPS Acc F1 DAF Prec MAE R2 κSRME RMSD Params Date Added TECE-OAM-RRA-1.0 0.908 0.978 0.929 6.073 0.928 0.018 0.871 0.093 0.058 222M 2026-07-05 EquFlashV2 0.907 0.978 0.929 6.069 0.928 0.018 0.873 0.094 0.058 44.9M 2026-06-11 EquiformerV3+DeNS-OAM 0.902 0.978 0.931 6.074 0.928 0.018 0.868 0.118 0.060 30.3M 2026-04-07 PET-OAM-XL 0.898 0.977 0.924 6.075 0.929 0.019 0.864 0.119 0.060 730M 2026-01-10 GRACE-3L-OAM-L 0.900 0.977 0.925 6.041 0.923 0.018 0.875 0.121 0.058 42.1M 2026-07-02 TACE-OAM-L 0.889 0.972 0.910 5.898 0.902 0.020 0.868 0.126 0.061 82.9M 2026-04-09 eSEN-30M-OAM 0.888 0.977 0.925 6.069 0.928 0.018 0.866 0.170 0.061 30.2M 2025-03-17 EquFlash 0.888 0.975 0.919 5.983 0.915 0.019 0.871 0.158 0.060 28.7M 2025-06-23 Nequip-OAM-XL 0.886 0.971 0.906 5.869 0.897 0.020 0.872 0.125 0.063 32.1M 2025-11-30 MatRIS-10M-OAM 0.877 0.976 0.921 6.039 0.923 0.019 0.871 0.218 0.060 10.4M 2025-10-29 SevenNet-Omni-i12 0.873 0.971 0.906 5.954 0.910 0.021 0.868 0.192 0.062 54.9M 2026-01-12 Nequip-OAM-L 0.870 0.967 0.893 5.823 0.890 0.022 0.865 0.166 0.065 9.6M 2025-09-08 GRACE-2L-OAM-L 0.865 0.964 0.883 5.840 0.893 0.022 0.862 0.169 0.064 26.4M 2025-09-09 ORB v3 0.860 0.971 0.905 5.912 0.904 0.024 0.821 0.210 0.075 25.5M 2025-04-05 DPA-4.0.1-Pro-MPtrj 0.840 0.956 0.857 5.609 0.857 0.029 0.836 0.211 0.069 22.8M 2026-06-11 Allegro-OAM-L 0.840 0.966 0.895 5.674 0.867 0.022 0.868 0.319 0.065 9.7M 2025-09-08 GRACE-2L-OAM 0.837 0.963 0.880 5.774 0.883 0.023 0.862 0.294 0.067 12.6M 2025-02-06 EquiformerV3+DeNS-MP 0.830 0.956 0.863 5.479 0.838 0.029 0.840 0.275 0.070 30.3M 2026-04-07 DPA-3.1-3M-FT 0.802 0.963 0.884 5.667 0.866 0.023 0.869 0.470 0.069 3.27M 2025-06-05 eSEN-30M-MP 0.797 0.946 0.831 5.260 0.804 0.033 0.822 0.340 0.075 30.1M 2025-03-17 MACE-MPA-0 0.795 0.954 0.852 5.582 0.853 0.028 0.842 0.412 0.073 9.06M 2024-12-09 MatRIS-10M-MP 0.778 0.951 0.847 5.422 0.829 0.031 0.824 0.489 0.072 10.4M 2025-10-29 AlphaNet-v1-OAM 0.769 0.968 0.901 5.747 0.879 0.024 0.831 0.644 0.079 4.65M 2025-05-12 MatterSim v1 5M 0.767 0.959 0.862 5.852 0.895 0.024 0.863 0.575 0.073 4.55M 2024-12-16 GRACE-1L-OAM 0.761 0.944 0.824 5.255 0.803 0.031 0.842 0.517 0.072 3.45M 2025-02-06 Eqnorm MPtrj 0.756 0.929 0.786 4.844 0.741 0.040 0.799 0.408 0.084 1.31M 2025-05-26 Nequix MP PFT 0.755 0.914 0.748 4.479 0.685 0.044 0.784 0.307 0.087 708k 2026-01-08 Nequip-MP-L 0.733 0.921 0.761 4.704 0.719 0.043 0.791 0.452 0.086 9.6M 2025-09-08 Nequix MP 0.729 0.914 0.751 4.455 0.681 0.044 0.782 0.446 0.085 708k 2025-08-17 Allegro-MP-L 0.720 0.915 0.751 4.516 0.690 0.044 0.778 0.504 0.082 18.7M 2025-09-08 SevenNet-l3i5 0.714 0.920 0.760 4.629 0.708 0.044 0.776 0.550 0.085 1.17M 2024-12-10 HIENet 0.707 0.929 0.777 4.932 0.754 0.041 0.793 0.642 0.080 7.51M 2025-07-01 GRACE-2L-MPtrj 0.681 0.895 0.691 4.163 0.636 0.052 0.741 0.526 0.090 15.3M 2024-11-21 MACE-MP-0 0.637 0.878 0.669 3.777 0.577 0.057 0.697 0.682 0.092 4.69M 2023-07-14 eqV2 M 0.558 0.975 0.917 6.047 0.924 0.020 0.848 1.771 0.069 86.6M 2024-10-18 ORB v2 0.528 0.965 0.880 6.041 0.924 0.028 0.824 1.734 0.097 25.2M 2024-10-11 eqV2 S DeNS 0.522 0.939 0.815 5.042 0.771 0.036 0.788 1.676 0.076 31.2M 2024-10-18 ORB v2 MPtrj 0.470 0.922 0.765 4.702 0.719 0.045 0.756 1.726 0.101 25.2M 2024-10-14 M3GNet 0.428 0.812 0.569 2.882 0.441 0.075 0.585 1.409 0.112 228k 2022-09-20 CHGNet 0.400 0.851 0.613 3.361 0.514 0.063 0.689 1.717 0.095 413k 2023-03-03 GNoME n/a 0.948 0.829 5.523 0.844 0.035 0.785 n/a n/a 16.2M 2024-02-03 

18