Title: Self-organized defect clustering and concentration-dependent vacancy diffusion in MoS_2

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.14951v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Jul 2026 01:37:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Self-organized defect clustering and concentration-dependent vacancy diffusion in MoS 2

Aaron Fl¨ ototto, 1, 2, ∗ Benjamin Spetzler, 3 Martin Ziegler, 3 Erich Runge, 1, 2 and Christian Dreßler 1, 2, †

> 1

Technische Universit¨ at Ilmenau, Institute of Physics, Weimarer Straße 25, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany 

> 2

Institute of Micro- and Nanotechnologies, Ehrenbergstraße 29, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany 

> 3

Christian-Albrechts-Universit¨ at zu Kiel, Institute of Materials Science, Kaiserstraße 2, 24143 Kiel, Germany 

(Dated: July 17, 2026) Sulfur vacancy migration has a crucial impact on electronic transport and the functional behav-ior of MoS 2-based devices such as memristors and memtransistors. According to recent atomistic simulations, vacancy migration proceeds via cooperative, vacancy-assisted sulfur jumps, implying strongly correlated defect dynamics. Here, we investigate the collective behavior of sulfur-vacancy clusters in MoS 2 using kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC) simulations with transition rates derived from machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. We identify three transport regimes: At low concentrations, vacancies are immobile or confined within small clusters, whereas at high concentrations, classical diffusive transport with a constant diffusion co-efficient is observed, and vacancies aggregate into anisotropically extended clusters. A well defined intermediate regime is characterized by clusters merging into a connected, fluctuating network with a concentration-dependent diffusion coefficient. This regime is characterized by a broad distribution of cluster sizes. The strong dependence of the vacancy diffusion coefficient on the average defect concentration provides new insights into the origin of memristive behavior observed in MoS 2.

I. INTRODUCTION 

Two-dimensional (2D) molybdenum disulfide (MoS 2)is a prototypical member of the transition metal dichalco-genide (TMDC) family and, arguably, the most exten-sively studied TMDC for novel electronic applications[1– 4]. The existence and migration of sulfur vacancies strongly affects material properties of MoS 2, including catalysis, chemical sensing, photoluminescence, and elec-tronic transport [5–10], and is therefore a key consid-eration in the design of MoS 2-based devices. Among a variety of electronic devices, memtransistors based on 2D MoS 2 are gaining increasing attention as next-generation computing devices [11–24]. Sulfur vacancy migration and the resulting fluctuation in the local vacancy concentra-tion within the conduction channel are widely recognized as key factors that control the material’s intrinsic trans-port properties and the operational behavior of such de-vices [11, 12, 14, 25–30]. While the dynamics of individual sulfur vacancies [31– 33] and isolated vacancy clusters [34–36] have previ-ously been studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations and machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP)-based molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, the collective dynamics of multiple vacancy clusters in MoS 2 and their dependence on vacancy concentration remain an important open question [37, 38]. Address-ing this problem in simulations at large time and length   

> ∗aaron.floetotto@tu-ilmenau.de
> †christian.dressler@tu-ilmenau.de

scales requires the inclusion of the recently identified co-operative vacancy migration mechanisms [34, 36] into kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC) models. Earlier KMC stud-ies [33, 39] do not explicitly incorporate the cooperative dynamics within sulfur-vacancy clusters observed in the MD simulations by us and others and, therefore, did not capture the concentration-dependent diffusion observed in the present work. The sulfur-vacancy dynamics in MoS 2 are governed by sulfur-atom jumps “assisted” by a second, adjacent vacancy [31–36]. In the absence of such an assisting vacancy, sulfur migration into an isolated vacancy is suppressed by an energy barrier exceeding 2 eV [31– 33, 35]. When a second vacancy is present, the minimum-energy path passes through an interstitial site centered between three now-vacant sulfur lattice sites. This co-operative jump mechanism lowers the energy barrier to 0.6–0.8 eV, allowing it to be thermally overcome at ex-perimentally relevant temperatures, as shown in DFT and MLIP calculations [31–34, 36, 40, 41] in agreement with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measure-ments [31, 42, 43]. The vacancy-assisted jump mechanism in MoS 2 bears similarities to mechanisms described in so-called kineti-cally constrained models, which have been put forward in the 1990’s as models for glassy systems and remain relevant today [44, 45]. In particular, the kinetically con-strained model introduced by J¨ ackle and Kronig [46, 47] is qualitatively similar to the actual hopping mecha-nism observed in MoS 2. They observe concentration-dependent transport and present arguments for a non-zero diffusion coefficient at all concentrations in the thermodynamic limit of an infinite lattice. Both find-arXiv:2607.14951v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 16 Jul 2026 2ings would have implications for MoS 2-based devices if they were transferable from this minimal kinetically con-strained model to the actual cooperative vacancy dynam-ics in MoS 2. However, while J¨ ackle and Kronig imple-mented a vacancy-assisted hopping rule on a triangular lattice that prohibits jumps of isolated vacancies, their model does not include MoS 2-specific features that favor the formation of large vacancy clusters over their dissoci-ation [36, 43]. In addition, computational limitations at the time restricted the time and length scales accessible in Monte-Carlo simulations. In the following, we derive KMC rates from MLIP-based MD simulations, perform KMC simulations of MoS 2 with initially random vacancy distributions to in-vestigate self-organized clustering, and analyze the re-sulting concentration-dependent vacancy-diffusion coeffi-cients.   

> II. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Transition rates from MLIP MD simulations

The MLIP MD simulations in Ref. [36] revealed dy-namical processes leading to the formation of vacancy clusters arising from the cooperative jump mechanism. Two or more adjacent vacancies are mobile only within a predefined triangular region because jumps leaving this region are blocked, either by a molybdenum atom be-neath the layer or by a neighboring sulfur atom that pro-hibits the low-energy jump through an interstitial site. If two vacancy clusters are arranged such that their triangu-lar mobile regions overlap, they can eventually meet and merge into a larger cluster confined to a larger triangular region, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Once merged, clusters typically remain connected due to an energetic stabiliza-tion of larger clusters, with only rare dissociation events into smaller sub-clusters driven by entropy. Accordingly, the association of vacancy clusters and their reverse dis-sociation into smaller sub-clusters were identified as the key motifs governing large-scale sulfur-vacancy dynamics in MoS 2 [36]. Here, we analyze MLIP MD simulations initialized with individual vacancy clusters to extract rates for two key cooperative vacancy-jump processes: cluster associa-tion and cluster dissociation, where operationally a clus-ter is defined as a set of vacancies occupying neighboring sites in the triangular S-atom layer. A KMC approach that applies these rates to simulate sulfur vacancy dy-namics is introduced at the beginning of Sect. II B. The MD simulations from which the corresponding rates are extracted apply the MLIP that was fine-tuned from the MACE MP-0 foundation model [49, 50] to best describe vacancy dynamics in MoS 2 and validated in Ref. [36]. To access transition rates of the two key processes, we sam-ple the corresponding first-passage times (FPTs) from the MD simulations. The analyzed data comprise 390 ns of MLIP MD sim-   

> FIG. 1. Illustration of slow and fast sulfur-vacancy jumps in a top-down view of a MoS 2monolayer: (a) slow jumps bring the ends of two small vacancy clusters into close proximity; (b) the two small defect clusters associate into a larger one, with the final jump occurring much faster. Sulfur atoms are shown in yellow (matte), sulfur vacancies in red (translucent), and molybdenum atoms in cyan (shiny). The regions accessible to three and six vacancies, respectively, are indicated by dashed red lines. The VMD (Visual Molecular Dynamics) software was used to create this figure [48].

ulations distributed over six trajectories containing clus-ters of 3–8 vacancies at T = 1000 K, as discussed at the end of Sect. II C. The number of connected sub-clusters resulting from the dissociation of an initially connected (”original”) cluster was determined using a depth-first graph traversal algorithm. To eliminate spurious transi-tions caused by vibrational motion near interstitial sites, we projected the atomic positions onto a grid of lattice and interstitial sites using a nearest-neighbor assignment. A transition was recorded only when all sulfur atoms were assigned to lattice sites in the respective frame. In this way, we determined all transitions from one to two connected clusters (dissociation) and the reverse tran-sitions from two to one connected cluster (association). Probability density histograms of the corresponding first-passage times ∆ t are shown in Fig. 2. Assuming Marko-vian two-state kinetics, the first-passage-time histograms can be described with the exponential probability density function (PDF) 

ρ(∆ t) = k exp( −k ∆t) (1) with the rate k. Fitting this PDF to the MD data yields the rates k2←1 for cluster dissociation and k1←2 for clus-ter association, averaged over cluster sizes and all config-urations with the same number of connected sub-clusters. Notably, the FPTs extracted from MD simulations ap-parently do not depend on the size of the vacancy cluster or its shape in this regime, as demonstrated in Sect. 1 of the Supplementary Information. The rates correspond-ing to the fitted PDF shown in Fig. 2 differ by almost two orders of magnitude: 

k2←1 = 1 .095 ns −1 = 10.913 ns (2) 

k1←2 = 101 .9 ns −1 = 10.0098 ns (3) 3(a) (b)   

> FIG. 2. Probability density histogram of the first-passage time for transitions between one and two connected sub-clusters: 1 →2 (a) and 2 →1 (b), from MLIP MD simulations with 3–8 vacancies.
> B. Self-organized clustering

Using these transition rates, we performed KMC sim-ulations employing the null-event (rejection) algorithm described in Ref. [51]. The KMC model treats vacan-cies as the mobile species and includes only cooperative, one-vacancy-assisted jumps, since non-assisted jumps are effectively suppressed by the large energy barrier dis-cussed above [36]. Based on the MLIP MD results (cf. Eqs. (2) and (3)), the KMC model distinguishes between two types of vacancy jumps: a fast process with the rate 

k1←2, in which a vacancy jump reduces the number of connected vacancy sub-clusters by one, and a slow pro-cess with the rate k2←1, which comprises all other cooper-ative vacancy jumps. These slow jumps either reverse the fast process or preserve the number of connected vacancy clusters, for example by introducing a kink into a previ-ously linear cluster. The latter cases are treated equally motivated by DFT results showing nearly identical en-ergy barriers for these processes [32, 33]. See Sect. III B below for more details on the KMC implementation. The KMC approach was validated by simulating in-dividual vacancy clusters and comparing the resulting sulfur mean squared displacements (MSDs) with those obtained from the corresponding MD simulations. The MSD is computed for given lag time τ as average over va-cancies i with positions ri(t) and over the starting times 

t0:MSD( τ ) = |ri(t0 + τ ) − ri(t0)|2 

> it0

. (4) As demonstrated in Sect. 2 of the Supplementary Infor-mation, both methods yield very similar results, apart from a constant offset arising from the continuous atomic positions in MD and the discrete state representation on a lattice in KMC. Here, this offset will be inconse-quential, as the diffusion coefficient depends only on the slope of the converged MSD according to the 2D Einstein-Smoluchowski equation: 

D = 14

 ddτ MSD( τ )

 

> τ→∞

(5) As a starting point for investigating long-range migra-tion in this KMC model, we analyze three 10 μs simula-tions with sulfur vacancy concentrations c = Nvac /N sites 

of 7, 12, and 18 % in a single sulfur layer with random ini-tial vacancy positions in a supercell with 70 × 70 sulfur sites. The convergence of the supercell size is demon-strated in Sect. 3 of the Supplementary Information. Figure 3 shows the number of vacancy transitions be-tween all pairs of lattice sites, clearly revealing mobile regions arising from cooperative vacancy jumps within clusters as also predicted by MD simulations [36]. From these transition counts, we determined an adjacency ma-trix of all lattice sites and counted the number of con-nected clusters using a depth-first search. Figure S4 in the Supplementary Information additionally shows the time evolution of the corresponding density of lattice site clusters that are connected by vacancy jumps in these three KMC simulations. Three different vacancy concen-trations are considered, each exhibiting distinct cluster-ing behavior: (i) At a low vacancy concentration of 7 %, only small clusters form in regions with a local vacancy density above the average. During the 10 μs simulation shown in the top row of Fig. 3, these clusters explore their entire triangular mobile regions. However, the mobile regions of different clusters rarely overlap, except at the very begin-ning of the simulation. Consequently, the clusters remain spatially localized. This results in a density of connected lattice sites clusters that is constant in time as shown in Fig. S4 of the Supplementary Information. (ii ) At an intermediate vacancy concentration of 12 % (center row of Fig.3), clusters with overlapping mobile regions become evident within the first few hundred nanoseconds of the simulation. As the simulation pro-gresses, these clusters merge, expanding their triangu-lar mobile regions. After 10 μs, many of the larger clus-ters have explored their entire mobile regions, which now overlap with additional clusters. Further expansion is ki-netically hindered on these timescales: vacancies in two large clusters with overlapping mobile regions must arrive simultaneously at the intersection of their mobile regions for both clusters to associate. Although diffusion across the entire supercell would be possible, this kinetic con-straint leaves some areas of the supercell unexplored, at least for all relevant time scales. (iii ) At a high vacancy concentration of 18 %, many overlapping clusters form rapidly, creating a connected network that is progressively explored. Accordingly, the density of connected lattice site clusters decreases rapidly (Fig. S4 of the Supplementary Information). After 10 μs, only relatively small regions remain unexplored, and nu-merous diffusion pathways span the entire supercell. These observations are illustrated from a complemen-tary perspective by Fig. 4: It presents the site-resolved vacancy occupation function, averaged over several 0.5 μstime intervals for the same simulations as shown in Fig. 3. At a vacancy concentration of 7 %, only relatively small clusters form, even after 10 μs. In addition, large regions containing isolated, essentially immobile vacancies per-sist. In the intermediate regime at 12 %, after 10 μs, some regions are completely free of stationary vacancies 4     

> FIG. 3. Time evolution of the number of sulfur-vacancy transitions between lattice site pairs from KMC simulations with vacancy concentrations of 7 %, 12 %, and 18 %. Transitions were sampled cumulatively from the beginning of the simulation up to 0.1 μs, 0.5 μs, 1 μs and 10 μs at intervals of 1 ns. Lattice sites are implied by small spheres, and each pair that was connected by a transition is indicated by a gray cylinder, with diameter scaled logarithmically to the transition count. Transitions across periodic boundaries are not shown, although periodic boundary conditions were applied during the simulations.

due to the formation of larger clusters, which are mobile as a result of cooperative vacancy jumps. However, other regions of the simulation cell still contain stationary va-cancies or small clusters with restricted mobility. At high vacancy concentrations (here c = 18 %), only a few but very large vacancy clusters form. Due to their effectively unrestricted mobility, most vacancies that were initially isolated are incorporated into clusters after 10 μs. While the transition counts (Fig. 3), with their trian-gular patterns resulting from cooperative jumps, high-light the mechanism underlying vacancy cluster forma-tion and migration, the averaged vacancy occupations (Fig. 4) provide insight into the cluster morphology. At any given time during the simulations, the larger clusters exhibit a rather elongated shape within their triangular accessible region, oriented along one of the symmetry di-rections. These shapes exhibit well-defined boundaries along threefold axes of the hexagonal lattice, which arise from the selection rules governing cooperative vacancy jumps. Videos with animated trajectories of the three corre-sponding KMC simulations are provided in Ref. [52]. At intermediate (12 %) and high (18 %) vacancy concentra-tions, vacancy clusters partially agglomerate into large voids. Although the formation of such voids leads to an increase in mechanical stress in the monolayer [31], it has previously been demonstrated in TEM measure-ments at T = 800 ◦C following high-energy electron ir-radiation [43]. While such large clusters are present at both intermediate and high concentrations in our simu-lations, small vacancy clusters and isolated, stationary vacancies clearly persist at a vacancy concentration of 12 % in our KMC simulations, whereas only few remain after equilibration at 18 %. To further investigate the clustering behavior, we de-fine a vacancy structure factor S(k) via the discrete Fourier transform of the zero-centered vacancy occupa-tion function n(R) in 2D. 

n(R, t ) = δvac (R, t ) − c (6) 

S(k, t ) = 1

> N

P 

> R

n(R, t ) e−ik·R 2 (7) Here, c = Nvac /N denotes the vacancy concentration and 

δvac (R, t ) = 1 if, at a given time t, the lattice site R is vacant and 0 else. The resulting structure factors averaged over 9 μs are shown in Fig. 5. At a low vacancy concentration of 7 %, the structure factor is essentially featureless and domi-nated by noise, indicating that the corresponding real-5      

> FIG. 4. Site-resolved sulfur vacancy occupation function averaged within 0.5 μs intervals shown in the complete 70 ×70 S sites supercell from KMC simulations at concentrations of 7 %, 12 %, and 18 %. Lattice sites that were vacant during the respective time interval are represented by spheres, with colors ranging linearly from yellow (low occupation probability) to red (high occupation probability) and the radius increasing linearly with the occupation probability. Lattice sites that were not vacant are indicated as small, gray dots.

space vacancy distribution remains largely disordered with little to no clustering and no longe-range correla-tions. At this concentration, large regions of the simula-tion cell exhibit no mobile vacancies (Figure 3). Instead, vacancies in these regions stationary and therefore pre-serve their initial random distribution. A different picture emerges at c = 12 %. As already suggested by the vacancy transition counts in Fig. 3, va-cancies begin to aggregate into finite-sized clusters. This behavior is reflected in the structure factor by the appear-ance of a broad peak around the Γ-point, accompanied by a largely featureless background at larger |k|.At a vacancy concentration of 18 %, the structure fac-tor changes qualitatively once more. While the broad peak at the Γ-point persists—indicating continued clus-tering—the structure factor now exhibits pronounced lines along the high-symmetry directions defined by the reciprocal lattice vectors b1 and b2 as well as b1 + b2.This reveals that the vacancy clusters in real-space are highly anisotropic, thereby affirming and quantifying the visual impression of the real-space vacancy occupation shown in Fig. 4.     

> FIG. 5. Vacancy structure factor computed via Eq. 7 from the same KMC simulations as Fig. 3 and 4. After an initial equilibration period of 1 μs, the data were averaged over the subsequent 9 μs of simulation time. The diagrams show the top view on the 2D reciprocal cell, centered around the Γ-point. The structure factor at the Γ-point is zero by definition and has been omitted here.

Overall, the structure factors shown in Fig. 5 high-light clear qualitative differences in the vacancy dynam-ics across the three concentrations, ranging from a disor-dered regime with small, localized clusters and localized 6vacancies to the formation of larger clusters and, finally, to anisotropically extended clusters. In the following, the influence of the sulfur-vacancy concentration on vacancy dynamics is investigated sys-tematically using KMC simulations with concentrations ranging from 5 % to 20 % in steps of 1 %. Such concen-trations have been shown to be experimentally achiev-able using a variety of techniques [5, 53–58]. However, a direct quantitative comparison with experimentally re-ported vacancy concentrations is often challenging, since the simulation values here strictly refer to the vacancy concentration within a single sulfur layer, whereas some experimental techniques are not exclusively sensitive to the topmost layer. A notable exception is vacancy quan-tification using scanning probe methods [57]. For each vacancy concentration analyzed here, ten sim-ulations were performed with different random initial va-cancy positions to capture the influence of structural dis-order on vacancy dynamics. Vacancy jumps between lat-tice sites were sampled at intervals of 2 ns to construct an adjacency matrix, from which the number of connected clusters of sulfur sites was determined. After an initial equilibration period of 4.5 μs in the KMC simulations, the density of connected lattice-site clusters was evalu-ated over the subsequent 0.5 μs of each simulation. The resulting dependence of the density of connected vacancy clusters on the vacancy concentration is shown in Fig. 6. As illustrated already by representative sim-ulations in Fig. 3 and 5, three distinct regimes emerge with increasing vacancy concentration.        

> FIG. 6. Density of connected vacancy clusters as a function of vacancy concentration. For each vacancy concentration, ten KMC simulations of 5 μs each were performed. The sim-ulations were initialized with random vacancy positions and have been equilibrated for 4.5 μs before determining the lattice site pairs connected by vacancy jumps during the final 0.5 μsof each simulation. Data points were horizontally shifted for clarity. Gray violin plots indicate kernel densities at each con-centration. The calculations were performed in a supercell of 70 ×70 sulfur-lattice sites. The minimal density, which cor-responds to the inverse of the supercell area, is indicated by a dashed horizontal line.

In the first regime, the density of connected lattice-site clusters increases trivially as additional neighboring vacancies appear and form small clusters. Since the cor-responding mobile regions do not overlap, these clusters remain localized. Hence, we refer to this regime as the lo-calized regime. The density of lattice site clusters reaches a maximum at a vacancy concentration of about 9 %. In an intermediate regime, mobile regions of vacancy clus-ters begin to overlap. This overlap promotes the asso-ciation of clusters, resulting in larger clusters that pro-gressively form a connected network in a self-organized manner resulting in a decrease of the number of inde-pendent clusters. Beside these larger clusters, numerous small connected lattice site clusters are still visible in this regime, hinting towards a critical, scale-free behavior at these intermediate vacancy concentrations. These small clusters typically show larger jump rates between the few sites and therefore appear darker in Fig. 3. Finally, at a vacancy concentration of approximately 14 %, the den-sity of connected lattice site clusters begins to saturate, eventually reaching a single cluster in three of the ten simulations at a vacancy concentration of 20 %. In this regime, the clusters extend over large portions or even the entirety of the 70 × 70 site supercell (cf. bottom row of Fig. 3).  

> C. Vacancy diffusion coefficients

After identifying the three regimes of concentration dependent sulfur-vacancy mobility in MoS 2, we deter-mine the corresponding diffusion coefficients. The va-cancy MSD was calculated according to Eq. 4 from the same KMC simulations discussed for Fig. 6. As shown in Sect. 5 of the Supplementary Information, the MSD exhibits linear lag-time dependence within the simulated time window, indicating diffusive behavior. Diffusion co-efficients D were obtained from linear regression over the interval τ ∈ [2 .5 μs, 3.5 μs]. As shown in Fig. 7, the three distinct regimes identified from the analysis of connected lattice-site clusters are clearly observed in the concentration-dependent diffusion coefficient as well. In the localized regime, the vacancy MSD initially in-creases (shown in Sect. 5 of the Supplementary Informa-tion). However, after a characteristic lag time required for vacancies in the numerous small clusters to explore their full (typically very small) mobile regions, the MSD reaches a plateau. As a result, no long-range diffusion is observed. The diffusion coefficient begins to increase from zero at a vacancy concentration of approximately 9 %, which conicides within the numerical accuracy with the maximum in the density of connected lattice-site clus-ters in Fig. 6. The diffusion coefficient increases with va-cancy concentration as more clusters associate, thereby enlarging their mobile regions. At the transition between the intermediate and extended regimes, where the den-sity of connected lattice-site clusters begins to saturate, the diffusion coefficient likewise levels off. At vacancy 7     

> FIG. 7. Diffusion coefficient Dof sulfur vacancies as a func-tion of concentration. Results were obtained from the same ten KMC simulations for each concentration as analyzed in Fig. 6. Diffusion coefficients were determined using a linear regression to the linear regime of the MSD (Eq. 5).

concentrations above ∼ 14 %, the diffusion coefficient ap-proaches an approximately constant value and remains nearly unchanged up to the highest analyzed vacancy concentration of 20 %. Finally, we make two brief remarks: (i) The emergence of three identical vacancy-concentration regimes both for the density of connected lattice-site clusters and for the diffusion coefficient (Fig. 6 and 7) indicates the presence of two distinct mechanisms suppressing vacancy diffusion: At low and intermediate concentrations ( c ≲ 14%), the diffusion coefficient is gov-erned by the size of individual vacancy clusters, whose mobility is confined to spatially limited regions until they merge with other clusters. In contrast, extended clusters form at high concentrations ( c ≳ 14%) and the diffusion coefficient D becomes limited by the rate of collective mi-gration within their mobile regions; consequently, further increases in cluster size do not lead to higher diffusion co-efficients, yielding approximately constant D, see Fig. 7. (ii ) The rates used in these KMC simulations (Eq. (2,3)) are derived from MD simulations of MoS 2

performed at a high temperature (1000 K), which cur-rently is of considerable interest due to the demand of electronic components for spezialized, high-temperature applications [30]. Determining diffusion coefficients for other, lower temperatures naturally requires additional modeling, but the emergence of the three distinct con-centration regimes is expected to depend only weakly on temperature.  

> D. Summary

We analyzed MLIP simulations of individual sulfur-vacancy clusters in MoS 2 at T = 1000 K, spanning hun-dreds of nanoseconds. Averaging over cluster shapes and sizes, we extracted rates for two processes previously identified as key mechanisms governing large-scale sulfur-vacancy dynamics. These are the dissociation of a con-nected cluster into two sub-clusters and the much faster reverse association process. These processes were used to parameterize a KMC model. Using the KMC model, we computed diffusion coeffi-cients in large supercells with initially random vacancy distributions and resolved their dependence on concen-tration. Three regimes emerge: (i) A localize regime showing only small, non-overlapping clusters resulting in the absence of long-range diffusion. (ii) In an inter-mediate regime, the diffusion coefficient increases with vacancy concentration due to enhanced, self-organized association of initially distinct clusters. (iii) Above con-centrations of ∼14%, extended clusters are formed consti-tuting a connected network, and the diffusion coefficient approaches a plateau. In particular, the large vacancy clusters formed in this regime are extended anisotropi-cally as shown by the 2D spatial Fourier transform of the vacancy occupation function. These findings bridge the gap between atomistic MD simulations, which resolve the underlying mechanisms, and continuum transport models of MoS 2-based de-vices. Together with the previously established link be-tween sulfur-vacancy mobility and memristive behavior in MoS 2 [12, 28], the concentration dependence identified here provides a key insight into the microscopic origin of this effect. This understanding offers new opportunities for the targeted control of defect dynamics and the opti-mization of MoS 2-based memristive devices.   

> III. METHODS A. Machine learning interatomic potential molecular dynamics

The MLIP employed in this work was fine-tuned from the MACE MP-0 foundation model [49, 50] using data of MoS 2 monolayers with two adjacent sulfur vacancies, as described and extensively validated in our previous work [36]. The training and test data were generated using the CP2K software package [59], following the pro-cedure outlined in Ref. [36]. The resulting MLIP model, together with the corresponding training and test data, is openly available [60]. The MLIP-based MD simulations were performed for MoS 2 monolayers containing three to eight adjacent va-cancies using the ASE software package [61]. The sim-ulations were carried out with a time step of 0.5 fs at a temperature of 1000 K, employing a Langevin thermo-stat. 8 

> B. Kinetic Monte-Carlo

The KMC simulations reported in this work were per-formed using the rejection KMC algorithm described in Ref. [51]. The source code is available in Ref. [62]. Each KMC step begins with the random selection of a vacancy for a potential jump. Subsequently, all possible jumps of that vacancy that conform to the vacancy-assisted jump mechanism characteristic of MoS 2, as described in the main text, are identified and the corresponding rates are enumerated. These rates are normalized by the maximal total jump rate for a single vacancy, resulting in a total rate (the sum of all rates at the site) in the range [0 , 1]. A uniform random number in the same range is then drawn. If the random number exceeds the total rate, the attempted jump is rejected. Otherwise, a specific jump is selected in the typical KMC manner via the position of the random number within the cumulative sum of the individual jump rates. With the MD-sampled jump rates described in the con-text of Fig. 2 in the main manuscript, the maximal total rate kmax for a single vacancy equals the rate of clus-ter association. As proposed in Ref. [51], the simulation time is advanced in each KMC iteration by the average increment 1 / (N k max ), where N is the number of vacan-cies in the system. Using an averaged time increment is justified because the results reported in this work depend only on dynamic quantities involving a large number of KMC events. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY

The fine-tuned MACE MLIP model, together with the corresponding fine-tuning data as well as the MLIP training and DFT input files, are publicly available in Ref. [60]. The KMC trajectories underlying Fig. 3, Fig.4 and Fig. 5 here as well as Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Information together with corresponding animations are published in Ref. [52]. The remaining data are available from the authors upon request. 

> CODE AVAILABILITY

The source code used to run KMC simulations is avail-able in Ref. [62]. The source code used to analyze MD and KMC trajectories is available in Ref. [63]. 

> ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank Henning Schwanbeck and his col-leagues at the University Computing Center of the TU Ilmenau for excellent working conditions and continued support. In early stages of this work support through the projects “MemWerk” and “Ilmenau School of Green Electronics” (P2022-00-135) that were made possible by funding from the Carl–Zeiss–Stiftung was received and is gratefully acknowledged. 

> AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors contributed equally to the conceptualiza-tion of the study. E.R. and C.D. supervised the work throughout the project. A.F. developed the kinetic Monte-Carlo software, carried out the investigation, per-formed the formal analysis, and prepared the visualiza-tions. A.F. wrote the original draft of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript. 

> COMPETING INTEREST

The authors declare no competing interests.                   

> [1] K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan, and T. F. Heinz, Atomically Thin MoS 2: A New Direct-Gap Semiconduc-tor, Physical Review Letters 105 , 136805 (2010). [2] B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti, and A. Kis, Single-layer MoS 2transistors, Nature Nan-otechnology 6, 147 (2011). [3] Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Cole-man, and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Na-ture Nanotechnology 7, 699 (2012). [4] M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh, and H. Zhang, The chemistry of two-dimensional lay-ered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets, Nature Chemistry 5, 263 (2013). [5] L. Li, Z. Qin, L. Ries, S. Hong, T. Michel, J. Yang, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany, P. Miele, D. Kaplan, M. Chhowalla, and D. Voiry, Role of sulfur vacancies and undercoordinated Mo regions in MoS 2nanosheets toward the evolution of hydrogen, ACS Nano 13 , 6824 (2019). [6] J. Hu, L. Yu, J. Deng, Y. Wang, K. Cheng, C. Ma, Q. Zhang, W. Wen, S. Yu, Y. Pan, J. Yang, H. Ma, F. Qi, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, M. Chen, R. Huang, S. Zhang, Z. Zhao, J. Mao, X. Meng, Q. Ji, G. Hou, X. Han, X. Bao, Y. Wang, and D. Deng, Sulfur vacancy-rich MoS 2as a catalyst for the hydrogenation of CO 2to methanol, Na-ture Catalysis 4, 242 (2021). [7] H. Fei, R. Liu, J. Wang, T. Guo, Z. Wu, D. Wang, and F. Liu, Targeted modulation of competitive active sites toward nitrogen fixation via sulfur vacancy engineering over MoS 2, Advanced Functional Materials 33 , 2302501 (2023).

9

[8] X. Jin, T. Lee, A. Soon, and S.-J. Hwang, Vacancy-assisted transformation of MoS 2 nanosheets into de-fective MoS x nanoclusters to regulate sodium-ion elec-trode functionality, Advanced Functional Materials 34 ,2316446 (2024). [9] B. A. Chen, A. J. Rowberg, T. A. Pham, T. Ogitsu, P. V. Kamat, and S. Ptasinska, Reactivity of sulfur vacancy-rich MoS 2 to water dissociation, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 128 , 10379 (2024). [10] X. Pang, Q. Zhang, X. Liang, W. Qin, H. Xu, and Y. Zhao, Sulfur vacancy synergistically coupling grain cluster for boosting MoS 2 piezoresistive properties, Jour-nal of Applied Physics 136 , 125106 (2024). [11] V. K. Sangwan, D. Jariwala, I. S. Kim, K.-S. Chen, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon, and M. C. Hersam, Gate-tunable memristive phenomena mediated by grain boundaries in single-layer MoS 2, Nature Nanotechnology 10 , 403 (2015). [12] D. Li, B. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Wang, B. Ryu, W. D. Lu, W. Lu, and X. Liang, MoS 2 memristors exhibiting vari-able switching characteristics toward biorealistic synaptic emulation, ACS Nano 12 , 9240 (2018). [13] V. K. Sangwan, H. S. Lee, H. Bergeron, I. Balla, M. E. Beck, K. S. Chen, and M. C. Hersam, Multi-terminal memtransistors from polycrystalline monolayer molybde-num disulfide, Nature 554 , 500 (2018). [14] J. Jadwiszczak, D. Keane, P. Maguire, C. P. Cullen, Y. Zhou, H. Song, C. Downing, D. Fox, N. McEvoy, R. Zhu, J. Xu, G. S. Duesberg, Z. M. Liao, J. J. Boland, and H. Zhang, MoS 2 memtransistors fabricated by local-ized helium ion beam irradiation, ACS Nano 13 , 14262 (2019). [15] L. Wang, W. Liao, S. L. Wong, Z. G. Yu, S. Li, Y. F. Lim, X. Feng, W. C. Tan, X. Huang, L. Chen, L. Liu, J. Chen, X. Gong, C. Zhu, X. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, D. Chi, and K. W. Ang, Artificial synapses based on multiterminal memtransistors for neuromorphic application, Advanced Functional Materials 29 , 1901106 (2019). [16] H. S. Lee, V. K. Sangwan, W. A. Rojas, H. Berg-eron, H. Y. Jeong, J. Yuan, K. Su, and M. C. Her-sam, Dual-gated MoS 2 memtransistor crossbar array, Ad-vanced Functional Materials 30 , 2003683 (2020). [17] X. Feng, S. Li, S. L. Wong, S. Tong, L. Chen, P. Zhang, L. Wang, X. Fong, D. Chi, and K. W. Ang, Self-selective multi-terminal memtransistor crossbar array for in-memory computing, ACS Nano 15 , 1764 (2021). [18] J. Yuan, S. E. Liu, A. Shylendra, W. A. G. Rojas, S. Guo, H. Bergeron, S. Li, H. S. Lee, S. Nasrin, V. K. Sangwan, A. R. Trivedi, and M. C. Hersam, Reconfigurable MoS 2

memtransistors for continuous learning in spiking neural networks, Nano Letters 21 , 6432 (2021). [19] S. Fu, J. H. Park, H. Gao, T. Zhang, X. Ji, T. Fu, L. Sun, J. Kong, and J. Yao, Two-terminal MoS 2 memristor and the homogeneous integration with a MoS 2 transistor for neural networks, Nano Letters 23 , 5869 (2023). [20] G. M. Marega, H. G. Ji, Z. Wang, G. Pasquale, M. Tri-pathi, A. Radenovic, and A. Kis, A large-scale integrated vector–matrix multiplication processor based on mono-layer molybdenum disulfide memories, Nature Electron-ics 6, 991 (2023). [21] K. Zhu, S. Pazos, F. Aguirre, Y. Shen, Y. Yuan, W. Zheng, O. Alharbi, M. A. Villena, B. Fang, X. Li, A. Milozzi, M. Farronato, M. Mu˜ noz-Rojo, T. Wang, R. Li, H. Fariborzi, J. B. Roldan, G. Benstetter, X. Zhang, H. N. Alshareef, T. Grasser, H. Wu, D. Ielmini, and M. Lanza, Hybrid 2D–CMOS microchips for mem-ristive applications, Nature 618 , 57 (2023). [22] S. E. Liu, T. T. Zeng, R. Wu, V. K. Sangwan, and M. C. Hersam, Low-voltage short-channel MoS 2 mem-transistors with high gate-tunability, Journal of Materi-als Research 39 , 1463 (2024). [23] S. T. Yang, T. H. Yang, B. W. Liang, H. C. Lo, W. H. Chang, P. Y. Lin, C. Y. Su, and Y. W. Lan, Submicron memtransistors made from monocrystalline molybdenum disulfide, ACS Nano 18 , 6936 (2024). [24] T. Zou, S. Heo, G. Byeon, S. Yoo, M. Kim, Y. Reo, S. Kim, A. Liu, and Y. Y. Noh, Two-dimensional tun-neling memtransistor with thin-film heterostructure for low-power logic-in-memory complementary metal-oxide semiconductor, ACS Nano 18 , 13849 (2024). [25] H. Li, L. Tao, and J. B. Xu, Intrinsic memristive mecha-nisms in 2D layered materials for high-performance mem-ory, Journal of Applied Physics 129 , 050902 (2021). [26] B. Spetzler, Z. Geng, K. Rossnagel, M. Ziegler, and F. Schwierz, Lateral 2D TMDC memristors - experiment and modeling, in Proceedings of 2022 IEEE 16th Inter-national Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Cir-cuit Technology, ICSICT 2022 (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022). [27] D. Abdel, M. Herda, M. Ziegler, C. Chainais-Hillairet, B. Spetzler, and P. Farrell, Numerical analysis and sim-ulation of lateral memristive devices: Schottky, ohmic, and multi-dimensional electrode models, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 199 , 286 (2025). [28] B. Spetzler, D. Abdel, F. Schwierz, M. Ziegler, and P. Farrell, The role of vacancy dynamics in two-dimensional memristive devices, Advanced Electronic Materials 10 , 2300635 (2023). [29] B. Spetzler, V. K. Sangwan, M. C. Hersam, and M. Ziegler, High-throughput numerical modeling of the tunable synaptic behavior in 2D MoS 2 memristive de-vices, npj 2D Materials and Applications 9, 17 (2025). [30] C. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Chen, B. Zhao, W. Wang, Z. Li, R. Shi, and K. Liu, Vacancy-migration-enabled, two-dimensional gate-free neuromorphic devices for high-temperature applications, Advanced Functional Materi-als , e31998 (2026). [31] H. P. Komsa, S. Kurasch, O. Lehtinen, U. Kaiser, and A. V. Krasheninnikov, From point to extended defects in two-dimensional MoS 2: Evolution of atomic struc-ture under electron irradiation, Physical Review B - Con-densed Matter and Materials Physics 88 , 035301 (2013). [32] C. Gao, X. Yang, M. Jiang, L. Chen, Z. Chen, and C. V. Singh, Defect evolution behaviors from single sulfur point vacancies to line vacancies in monolayer molybde-num disulfide, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 23 ,19525 (2021). [33] P. Y. Wang, B. A. Chen, Y. C. Lee, and C. C. Chiu, First-principles modeling of the highly dynamical surface structure of a MoS 2 catalyst with S-vacancies, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 24 , 24166 (2022). [34] A. Hloˇ zn´ y, J. Brndiar, M. Casula, and I. ˇStich, Struc-ture and dynamics of sulfur vacancies in monolayer MoS 2

studied by DFT-based machine learning potentials, Jour-nal of Chemical Physics 163 , 214118 (2025). [35] A. Hloˇ zn´ y, J. Brndiar, Y. Luo, and I. ˇStich, Upscal-ing DFT-trained machine-learning interatomic poten-tial toward Quantum Monte Carlo accuracy: Sulfur-10 

vacancy migration in monolayer MoS 2 as a testbed (2026), arXiv:2605.22601. [36] A. Fl¨ ototto, B. Spetzler, R. von Stackelberg, M. Ziegler, E. Runge, and C. Dreßler, Large-scale cooperative sul-fur vacancy dynamics in two-dimensional MoS 2 from ma-chine learning interatomic potentials, Small 22 , e10679 (2026). [37] S. M. Gali, A. Pershin, A. Lherbier, J. C. Charlier, and D. Beljonne, Electronic and transport properties in defec-tive MoS 2: Impact of sulfur vacancies, Journal of Physi-cal Chemistry C 124 , 15076 (2020). [38] C. Speckmann, K. Mustonen, D. Propst, C. Mangler, and J. Kotakoski, Electron irradiation effects on monolayer MoS 2 at elevated temperatures, Physical Review B 111 ,054107 (2025). [39] P. Y. Wang, C. C. Yeh, M. J. Chiu, and C. C. Chiu, A comparative study on the linear scaling relations for the diffusion of S-vacancies on MoS 2 and WS 2, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 26 , 5070 (2024). [40] J. H¨ anseroth, A. Fl¨ ototto, M. N. Qaisrani, and C. Dreßler, Fine-tuning unifies foundational machine-learned interatomic potential architectures at ab initio accuracy, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 17 ,3152 (2026). [41] J. H¨ anseroth, A. Fl¨ ototto, and C. Dreßler, Universal in-teratomic potentials as configuration-space generators for one-shot and iterative fine-tuning of ab initio-accurate material-specific models (2026), arXiv:2606.23214 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. [42] S. Zhou, S. Wang, H. Li, W. Xu, C. Gong, J. C. Gross-man, and J. H. Warner, Atomic structure and dynam-ics of defects in 2D MoS 2 bilayers, ACS Omega 2, 3315 (2017). [43] Q. Chen, H. Li, S. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Chen, H. Sawada, C. S. Allen, A. I. Kirkland, J. C. Grossman, and J. H. Warner, Ultralong 1D vacancy channels for rapid atomic migration during 2D void formation in monolayer MoS 2,ACS Nano 12 , 7721 (2018). [44] F. Ritort and P. Sollich, Glassy dynamics of kinetically constrained models, Advances in Physics 52 , 219 (2003). [45] L. Causer, I. Lesanovsky, M. C. Ba˜ nuls, and J. P. Garrahan, Dynamics and large deviation transitions of the XOR-Fredrickson-Andersen kinetically constrained model, Physical Review E 102 , 052132 (2020). [46] J. J¨ ackle and A. Kronig, A kinetic lattice-gas model for the triangular lattice with strong dynamic correlations. I. Self-diffusion, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 

6, 7633 (1994). [47] A. Kronig and J. Jackle, A kinetic lattice-gas model for the triangular lattice with strong dynamic correlations. ii. Collective diffusion, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 6, 7655 (1994). [48] W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, VMD: Visual Molecular Dynamics, Journal of Molecular Graphics 14 ,33 (1996). [49] I. Batatia, D. P. Kovacs, G. Simm, C. Ortner, and G. Csanyi, MACE: Higher order equivariant message passing neural networks for fast and accurate force fields, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,Vol. 35 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2022) pp. 11423–11436. [50] I. Batatia, P. Benner, Y. Chiang, A. M. Elena, D. P. Kov´ acs, J. Riebesell, X. R. Advincula, M. Asta, M. Avaylon, W. J. Baldwin, F. Berger, N. Bernstein, A. Bhowmik, S. M. Blau, V. C˘ arare, J. P. Darby, S. De, F. D. Pia, V. L. Deringer, R. Elijoˇ sius, Z. El-Machachi, F. Falcioni, E. Fako, A. C. Ferrari, A. Genreith-Schriever, J. George, R. E. A. Goodall, C. P. Grey, P. Grig-orev, S. Han, W. Handley, H. H. Heenen, K. Hermans-son, C. Holm, J. Jaafar, S. Hofmann, K. S. Jakob, H. Jung, V. Kapil, A. D. Kaplan, N. Karimitari, J. R. Kermode, N. Kroupa, J. Kullgren, M. C. Kuner, D. Kuryla, G. Liepuoniute, J. T. Margraf, I.-B. Magd˘ au, A. Michaelides, J. H. Moore, A. A. Naik, S. P. Niblett, S. W. Norwood, N. O’Neill, C. Ortner, K. A. Persson, K. Reuter, A. S. Rosen, L. L. Schaaf, C. Schran, B. X. Shi, E. Sivonxay, T. K. Stenczel, V. Svahn, C. Sutton, T. D. Swinburne, J. Tilly, C. van der Oord, E. Varga-Umbrich, T. Vegge, M. Vondr´ ak, Y. Wang, W. C. Witt, F. Zills, and G. Cs´ anyi, A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry, arxiv::2401.00096 (2023). [51] A. Chatterjee and D. G. Vlachos, An overview of spatial microscopic and accelerated kinetic Monte-Carlo meth-ods, Journal of Computer-Aided Materials Design 14 ,253 (2007). [52] A. Fl¨ ototto, E. Runge, and C. Dreßler, Visualization of self-organized defect clustering and concentration-dependent vacancy diffusion in MoS 2, www.doi.org/10. 71758/refodat.88 (2026), research data repository (RE-FODAT). [53] Q. Ma, P. M. Odenthal, J. Mann, D. Le, C. S. Wang, Y. Zhu, T. Chen, D. Sun, K. Yamaguchi, T. Tran, M. Wurch, J. L. McKinley, J. Wyrick, K. Magnone, T. F. Heinz, T. S. Rahman, R. Kawakami, and L. Bartels, Con-trolled argon beam-induced desulfurization of monolayer molybdenum disulfide, Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 25 , 252201 (2013). [54] C. C. Cheng, A. Y. Lu, C. C. Tseng, X. Yang, M. N. Hedhili, M. C. Chen, K. H. Wei, and L. J. Li, Activating basal-plane catalytic activity of two-dimensional MoS 2

monolayer with remote hydrogen plasma, Nano Energy 

30 , 846 (2016). [55] S. Bertolazzi, S. Bonacchi, G. Nan, A. Pershin, D. Beljonne, and P. Samor` ı, Engineering chemically ac-tive defects in monolayer MoS 2 transistors via ion-beam irradiation and their healing via vapor deposition of alka-nethiols, Advanced Materials 29 , 1606760 (2017). [56] C. Tsai, H. Li, S. Park, J. Park, H. S. Han, J. K. Nørskov, X. Zheng, and F. Abild-Pedersen, Electrochemical gen-eration of sulfur vacancies in the basal plane of MoS 2

for hydrogen evolution, Nature Communications 8, 15113 (2017). [57] J. Y. Lee, J. H. Kim, Y. Jung, J. C. Shin, Y. Lee, K. Kim, N. Kim, A. M. van der Zande, J. Son, and G. H. Lee, Evolution of defect formation during atomically precise desulfurization of monolayer MoS 2, Communications Ma-terials 2, 80 (2021). [58] P. Man, S. Jiang, K. H. Leung, K. H. Lai, Z. Guang, H. Chen, L. Huang, T. Chen, S. Gao, Y. K. Peng, C. S. Lee, Q. Deng, J. Zhao, and T. H. Ly, Salt-induced high-density vacancy-rich 2D MoS 2 for efficient hydrogen evo-lution, Advanced Materials 36 , 2304808 (2024). [59] T. D. K¨ uhne, M. Iannuzzi, M. D. Ben, V. V. Ry-bkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khal-iullin, O. Sch¨ utt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wil-helm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borˇ stnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Laz-zaro, H. Pabst, T. M¨ uller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, 11 

A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Gl¨ oß, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. Vande-Vondele, M. Krack, and J. Hutter, CP2K: An electronic structure and molecular dynamics software package -Quickstep: Efficient and accurate electronic structure calculations, Journal of Chemical Physics 152 , 194103 (2020). [60] A. Fl¨ ototto, B. Spetzler, R. von Stackelberg, M. Ziegler, E. Runge, and C. Dreßler, Machine learning inter-atomic potentials for sulfur vacancy dynamics in single sheet MoS 2, https://refodat.de/receive/refodat_ mods_00000068 (2025), research data repository (REFO-DAT). [61] A. H. Larsen, J. J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E. Castelli, R. Christensen, M. Dulak, J. Friis, M. N. Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, E. D. Hermes, P. C. Jennings, P. B. Jensen, J. Kermode, J. R. Kitchin, E. L. Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, K. Kaasbjerg, S. Lysgaard, J. B. Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen, L. Pastewka, A. Pe-terson, C. Rostgaard, J. Schiøtz, O. Sch¨ utt, M. Strange, K. S. Thygesen, T. Vegge, L. Vilhelmsen, M. Walter, Z. Zeng, and K. W. Jacobsen, The atomic simulation environment—a python library for working with atoms, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29 , 273002 (2017). [62] A. Fl¨ ototto, E. Runge, and C. Dreßler, MoS 2 kinetic Monte-Marlo source code repository (2026), https: //github.com/afloetotto/mos2_montecarlo (commit 51448a1). [63] A. Fl¨ ototto, Simulation Package for Atomistic Modelling (SPAM) (2026), https://github.com/afloetotto/spam 

(commit 05185c4). Supplementary Material: Self-organized defect clustering and concentration-dependent vacancy diffusion in MoS 2

Aaron Fl¨ ototto, 1, 2, ∗ Benjamin Spetzler, 3 Martin Ziegler, 3 Erich Runge, 1, 2 and Christian Dreßler 1, 2 

> 1

Technische Universit¨ at Ilmenau, Institute of Physics, Weimarer Straße 25, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany 

> 2

Institute of Micro- and Nanotechnologies, Ehrenbergstraße 29, 98693 Ilmenau, Germany 

> 3

Christian-Albrechts-Universit¨ at zu Kiel, Institute of Materials Science, Kaiserstraße 2, 24143 Kiel, Germany 

(Dated: July 17, 2026) 

The Supplementary Material addresses the following issues: I Cluster-size dependence of first-passage times II Comparison between kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC) and machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations III Cell size convergence for KMC simulations IV Equilibration of the density of connected lattice site clusters V Diffusivity from sulfur vacancy mean squared displacements VI Links to additional material  

> ∗aaron.floetotto@tu-ilmenau.de

2 

> I. CLUSTER-SIZE DEPENDENCE OF FIRST-PASSAGE TIMES

As described in the main manuscript, the rates for dissociation and association of vacancy clusters in KMC simula-tions were determined by evaluating corresponding first-passage times (FPTs) in MLIP-based MD simulations. The FPTs shown in Fig. 2 of the main manuscript were sampled from multiple MD simulations of clusters containing 3 to 8 vacancies, comprising a total simulation time of 390 ns. To assess the validity of averaging FPTs over different cluster sizes, we fitted the FPTs data from each simulation individually by exponential curves, i.e. straight lines on logarithmic plots. As shown in Fig. S1, the resulting probability density curves exhibit significant scatter due to the reduced data quantity in each individual curve. Importantly, no systematic trend is observed linking cluster size to the FPT for either cluster dissociation or association. (a) (b)    

> FIG. S1. Probability density histogram for the FPT of the transition from 1 to 2 (a) and 2 to 1 (b) connected sub-clusters in MLIP MD simulations with 3-8 vacancies. In contrast to Figure 2 of the main article, separate probability densities and (exponential) fits are shown for each simulation and, therefore, each cluster size.
> II. COMPARISON BETWEEN KMC AND MLIP MD SIMULATIONS

In order to check the validity of the assumptions made during the construction of the KMC model, we compared the resulting sulfur atom dynamics with reference data from MLIP-based MD simulations. Figure S2 shows a comparison of sulfur atom mean squared displacements (MSDs) (Eq. 4 of the main manuscript) from MD and KMC simulations of an individual vacancy cluster consisting of 4, 5 and 6 vacancies, respectively. 4 vacancies (a) (b) (c) 5 vacancies 6 vacancies  

> FIG. S2. Comparison between MSDs calculated from MLIP MD simulations and KMC simulations. The comparison is shown for simulations of one individual cluster — starting as a straight line of sulfur vacancies. The clusters contain 4 (a), 5 (b) or 6 (c) vacancies, respectively.

The MSD curves from MD simulations show a rapid initial increase due to atomic vibrations around the equilibrium position, which obviously is not present in the KMC simulations based on discrete positions. This yields an approxi-3mately constant offset between the corresponding MSD curves. Except for this constant offset, the two methods yield very similar results. For the small cluster consisting of 4 vacancies, both methods predict the sulfur MSD to reach a constant value after a lag time of about 4 ns. For the larger vacancy clusters consisting of 5 and 6 vacancies, the two methods result in very similar slopes of the MSD curves. Therefore, the KMC model is also able to estimate sufficiently accurate diffusion coefficients (Eq. 5 of the main manuscript) for these defect clusters. It is worth noting that the time required for a cluster to sufficiently explore its mobile region increases with cluster size. This limits the cluster sizes for which converged MLIP-based MD simulations can be obtained.  

> III. CELL SIZE CONVERGENCE FOR KMC SIMULATIONS

Finite-size effects can significantly influence Monte Carlo simulations of cooperative vacancy hopping, as small supercell sizes may lead to a dependence of dynamical quantities such as the MSD and diffusion coefficient D on the initial configuration [1]. To ensure that such effects do not affect the results reported in this work, we performed a convergence test of the vacancy diffusion coefficient with respect to the supercell size. These simulations were carried out at an intermediate vacancy concentration of 14 %. The diffusion coefficients were obtained from the slope of the MSD curves at long lag times, according to Eq. 5 in the main manuscript. As shown in Fig. S3, the diffusion coefficient converges and exhibits only relatively little variation between simulations with different initial vacancy configurations at a supercell size of 4900 sulfur sites, corresponding to a 70 × 70 cell, which was therefore used in all subsequent simulations. This variability between simulations with identical parameters but different initial void configurations is also evident in the presentation of the key results Figs. 4 and 5 of the main manuscript. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000       

> supercell size (number of S sites)
> 0.0000
> 0.0025
> 0.0050
> 0.0075
> 0.0100
> 0.0125
> 0.0150
> 0.0175
> D (sites 2 / ns)
> FIG. S3. Convergence test for the supercell size with random initial vacancy positions and a vacancy density of 14 % showing the supercell size dependence. 10 3 μs long KMC simulations were performed for each supercell size. Diffusion coefficients were calculated from a linear regression to the linear part of the MSD according to Equation 5 of the main article. Later KMC simulations were performed with a supercell size of 4900 sulfur sites leading to a supercell edge length of 22.3 nm.
> IV. EQUILIBRATION OF THE DENSITY OF CONNECTED LATTICE SITE CLUSTERS

The number of clusters of lattice sites connected by vacancy jumps, identified within a given time interval of a KMC simulation, evolves over the course of the simulation. The simulations reported here are initialized with a random distribution of vacancies across the supercell. During the simulation, vacancies migrate exclusively via the cooperative jump mechanism described previously [2], leading to self-organization into clusters over time. Figure S4 shows the equilibration of the density of connected lattice-site clusters over different time intervals in the KMC simulations, which were also analyzed in Fig. 3 of the main manuscript. The three vacancy concentrations considered here lie within the three distinct diffusion regimes identified in this work. In all three cases, the equilibration is reached at approximately 5 ns. 40 2 4 6 8 10 

> t (μs)
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> cluster density in  t (10  3/Å2) c (%)
> 7
> 12
> 18

FIG. S4. Time evolution of the density of connected clusters among lattice sites that participated in vacancy jumps for different vacancy concentrations c, corresponding to the simulations visualized in Fig. 3 of the main article. Each data point was obtained by identifying connected lattice-site pairs within the time interval since the previous data point or since the beginning of the simulation. Clusters among these connected sites were identified using a depth-first graph traversal algorithm. Only lattice sites that were occupied by a vacancy at least once during the simulation were considered. 

V. DIFFUSIVITY FROM SULFUR VACANCY MEAN SQUARED DISPLACEMENTS 

The diffusion coefficients reported in this work were extracted from KMC simulations by analyzing the vacancy MSD according to Eqs. 4 and 5 of the main manuscript. This approach is valid only in the long-lag-time limit, where diffusive motion is characterized by a linear increase of the MSD with time, corresponding to a constant MSD /τ .At shorter times, deviations from this linear behavior may occur due to transient or constrained dynamics. As demonstrated in Fig. S5, the vacancy MSDs reach the linear, diffusive regime within the 5 μs duration of the KMC simulations reported in Figs. 4 and 5 of the main manuscript, ensuring that the calculated diffusion coefficients are well converged. (a) (b) 

FIG. S5. Sulfur vacancy MSD as a function of lag time (see Eq. 4 of the main article) for different vacancy concentrations. For each concentration, ten KMC simulations with a duration of 5 μs were performed. The diffusion coefficients reported in Fig. 5 of the main manuscript were obtained from linear regressions of the MSDs (panel (a)) in the range 2 .5 μs < τ < 3.5 μs, according to Eq. 5 in the main manuscript. The corresponding MSD /τ curves shown in panel (b) confirm the linear behavior in this time interval. 5

VI. LINKS TO ADDITIONAL MATERIAL 

Videos corresponding to KMC calculations underlying Fig. 3 and Fig. S4 can be found at: https://doi.org/10. 71758/refodat.88 

The KMC source code used in this study is available at: https://github.com/afloetotto/mos2_montecarlo 

[1] J. J¨ ackle and A. Kronig, A kinetic lattice-gas model for the triangular lattice with strong dynamic correlations. I. Self-diffusion, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 6, 7633 (1994). [2] A. Fl¨ ototto, B. Spetzler, R. von Stackelberg, M. Ziegler, E. Runge, and C. Dreßler, Large-scale cooperative sulfur vacancy dynamics in two-dimensional MoS 2 from machine learning interatomic potentials, Small 22 , e10679 (2026).