Title: 2607.04095v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04095v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 01:56:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 54

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 54 

# ML and AI for density functional theory : different priorities 

# for Kohn -Sham and orbital -free DFT , for electronic and 

# nuclear DFT 

Xin -Hui Wu ,a,1 Sergei Manzhos b,2 

> a

Department of Physics, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, Fujian, China  

> b

School of Materials and Chemical Technology, Institute of Science Tokyo, Ookayama 2 -12 -

1, Meguro -ku, Tokyo 152 -8552, Japan 

# Abstract 

We overview similarities and, importantly, differences in computational bottlenecks 

and accuracy requirements that can be addressed with machine learning (ML) and 

artificial intelligence (AI) techniques in electronic and nuclear DFT . From these follow 

different promising methodologic al and algorithmic choices depending on whether one 

machine learns the exchange correlation (XC) functional, the kinetic energy functional 

(KEF) , the density or the basis functions . In particular, while the popular deep neural 

net work s remain a potent choice in the context of KS DFT , we highlight their 

disadvantages when building KEF s and highlight conceptual advantages – yet to be 

fully realized - of symbolic regress ion for both electronic and nuclear DFT . We point 

out promising approaches that can be carried from the more extensively investigated 

ML -enhanced electronic DFT to nuclear DFT .

# 1 Introduction 

Density functional theory (DFT) has firmly established itself as a practical solution to quantum 

many -body problems in situations where the solution of many -particle equations describing the 

“ab initio world ” is impractical . We call the “ab initio wor ld” a set of elemental particles and       

> 1Correspondence: E-mail: wuxinhui@fzu.edu.cn
> 2Correspondence: E-mail: sergei.manzhos@mct.isct.ac.jp

Page 2 of 54 

interactions considered . We consider two such worlds: one contrived for the description of 

atoms, molecules, and chemical compounds under Born -Oppenhei mer approximation , and one 

contrived for the description of self -bound nuclei and nuclear matter. In the former case, the 

world consists of pointwise particles with electrostatic charges and masses mimicking nuclear 

cores and electrons . In the absence of relativistic effects (one often used approximation at the 

basis of the field of ab initio chemistry), elementary interactions include Coulombic 

interactions only . In addition, the electrons are treated as fermions with spin. In the case of 

clamped nuclei (another often used approximation at the bas is of the field of ab initio 

chemistry) this world is described by the Schrödinger equation for the electrons . Despite the 

simplicity of the interactions considered , the solution of the Schrödinger equation in principle 

allows computing energies, structures (via energy minimization with respect to nuclei 

positions ), electronic / band structures , bonding mechanisms, electronic excitations , and other 

properties of molecules and compounds with , in principle, any accuracy , barring non -BO and 

relativistic effects . At the same time, d espite the simplicity of the interactions involved, the 

high -dimensional nature (the number of degree s of freedom is 3 Ne, where Ne is the number of 

electrons) of the resulting Schrödinger equation makes its solution impractical except for 

smallest atoms and molecules due to strongly non -linear or combinatorial (depending on the 

method) scaling of CPU cost with system size .

In the case of nuclear physics , the ab initio world consists of nucleons, treated as 

massive fermions with spin and isospin degrees of freedom. These particles , which consist of 

quarks and gluons , interact through the strong nuclear force, supplemented by the Coulomb 

interaction. Since low -energy quantum chromodynamics is nonperturbative, practical ab initio 

nuclear theory does not usually start directly from quarks and gluons, but from effective 

interactions among nucleons. The nuclear Hamiltonian therefore contains nucleonic kinetic 

energy, two -nucleon interactions, and, in general, three - and higher -body interactions among 

nucleons . While the form of the kinetic energy operator (KEO) is the same for electrons and 

nucleons, i n contrast to the Coulomb interaction in the electronic problem, nuclear forces are 

short -ranged, strongly spin - and isospin -dependent, and contain central, tensor, spin -orbit, and 

many -body components. Another essential distinction is that nuclei are self -bound systems, 

with no external potential corresponding to the clamped nuclei in molecular electronic -

structure theory. The corresponding Schrödinger equation, or relativistic many -body equation 

for nuclei , in principle contains the information needed to compute nuclear binding energies, 

radii, shell structure, spectra, transitions, reactions, fission barriers, the nuclear -matter equation 

of state , etc . In practic e, its direct solution is very restricted , because of the rapidly increasing Page 3 of 54 

dimensionality of the many -nucleon Hilbert space, the complexity of nuclear interactions, and 

the importance of many -body correlations. 

In both the electronic and the nucle ar many -body problem, DFT offers a practical way 

to obviate the dimensionality scaling issue due to the number of particles by reducing the many -

body problem formulated in terms of N -body wave functions to the one -body level with the 

density distributions , whereby the energy is considered as a functional of the density – electron 

density in the case of electronic many -body systems or nucleon density in the case of nuclear 

many -body systems . The availability of such density functional would allow linear scaling of 

the cost with system size. In the absence of accurate universal density functionals, the idea of 

Kohn -Sham auxiliary system of non -interacting particles for many years offered a practical 

way to do DFT calculations with accuracy that is limited yet sufficient for most applications. 

KS DFT uses effective single -particle equations with effective potential s, within a mean -field 

paradigm . Despite the one -particle nature of the KS equation, t he dimensionality scaling of 

computational cost with system size is formally cubic due to the need to compute many 

solutions of an eigenproblem . The effective potential is more complex than the interactions in 

the original Schrödinger equation . E xchange and correlation (XC) effects are subsumed into 

XC functionals that become a key accuracy limitation . At the same time, XC functionals, if 

sufficiently accurate, allow approaching the construction of a density functional by focusing 

on the mode ling of non -interacting kinetic energy of the KS system . This is a key concept in 

orbital -free (OF) DFT pursued for both the electronic and nuclear problems. The accuracy of 

the kinetic energy functional (KEF) then becomes a key bottleneck. 

The use of m achine learning (ML), and recently of methods such as automatic formula 

discovery that move the field closer to the realm of artificial intelligence (AI) , ha s recently 

become popular in addressing both accuracy and CPU cost bottlenecks in both electronic and 

nuclear DFT, and in both KS and OF paradigms. The targets of such methods often involve XC 

and KE functionals (to alleviate accuracy limitations), density (electron or nucleon density, 

respectively, for the electronic and nuclear problem) – whose prediction have the value of 

improving both accuracy and speed of cal culations , and basis sets for computational efficiency. 

While targets such as functionals or density are common for the electronic and nuclear problem ,

and while certain qualitative criteria of accuracy are similar such as the reproduction of the 

shell structure of atoms and nuclei with ML functionals , quantitative and some qualitative 

criteria are different and some applications are specific, e.g. ML pseudopotentials for electronic 

DFT or symmetry -rest oration in nuclear DFT . A similar set of ML/AI methods have found use 

in all these applications , ranging from neural networks to kernel methods to trees to symbolic Page 4 of 54 

regression. However, the requirements for accuracy and for computational cost of ML/AI 

solutions are quite different depending on whether one considers electronic or nuclear DFT, 

KS or OF DFT. 

In this Perspective, we analyze similarities and differences in computational bottlenecks 

and accuracy requirements that can be addressed with machine learning and artificial 

intelligence techniques used for electronic and nuclear DFT in both Kohn -Sham and orbital -

free formulations . We overview key ML/AI target s and methods used in different flavors of 

DFT and show that f rom these follow different promising methodologic and algorithmic 

choices depending on whether one machine learns the exchange correlation (XC) functional, 

the kinetic energy functional (KEF), the density (electron density or nucleon density) , basis 

functions , or pseudopotentials (effective interaction ). We only briefly summarize the principles 

and key equations of electronic and nuclear DFT to the extent necessary to highlight their 

conceptual differences and differences that follow in how they can be improved with ML/AI 

or data -driven approaches in general. Excellent comprehensive reviewers are available of both 

KS 1,2 and orbital -free DFT 3 for the electronic problem as well as for the nuclear DFT. 4–8 We 

will also not introduce relevant machine learning and AI methods, as abundant literature is 

available. 9–14 We do not consider delta learning of the results (e.g. of energies, geometries) of 

more accurate methods from DFT results or methods that bypass DFT b y learning its outcomes 

from descriptors of chemical composition and structure ,15 –18 but consider instead how ML/AI 

methods can be used to improve the DFT engine itself. We focus on more or less promising 

ML/AI approaches for these different flavors of DFT. In particular, we suggest that while the 

popular deep neural nets remain a potent choice in the context of KS DFT, their disadvantages 

may become bottlenecks when building KEFs for OF -DFT . We highlight the promise of non -

NN methods for both electronic and nuclear DFT, and promising approaches that can be carried 

from the relatively more mature ML -enhanced electronic DFT to nuclear DFT . We also 

highlight conceptual advantages – although yet to be fully realized - of symbolic regression for 

both electronic and nuclear DFT , especially in the OF paradigm. Page 5 of 54 

# 2 Similarities and differences between electronic and nuclear DFT in 

# Kohn -Sham and orbital -free paradigms 

2.1 Brief summary of electronic DFT 

DFT for the electronic problem computes the energy of a system of Na ions (positioned at  𝑹 𝒊 

in the Cartesian space r) and Ne electrons as functional of electron density 19  𝜌 (𝒓 ∈ 𝑅 3),

𝐸 = 𝐸 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] = 𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] + ∫ 𝜌 (𝒓 )𝑣 𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝒓 )𝑑 𝒓 

(2.1 .1 )

where in Eq. ( 2.1 .1), E is further expanded into the contribution due to the energy of Coulombic 

interactions between the electron density and the ionic cores (or pseudoco res in the case of the 

use of pseudopotentials) and the contribution due to electron -electron interactions that can be 

related to the electron wavefunction  Ψ(𝒓 𝑒 ∈ 𝑅 3𝑁 𝑒 ) (not computed in DFT):  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] =

min 

> Ψ→𝜌

⟨Ψ|𝑇 ̂ + 𝑉 ̂𝑒𝑒 |Ψ⟩, where  𝑇 ̂ = ∇𝒓 𝑒  

> 2

is the kinetic energy operator, and  𝑉 ̂𝑒𝑒  is the operator for 

Coulombic electron -electron repulsion. 20 In the Kohn -Sham paradigm, 21 the electron density is 

represented as a sum of one -electron densities that are in turn represented as square moduli of 

wavefunctions called orbitals (in the following, we use atomic units unless stated otherwise 

and neglect spin and partial occupancy without loss of generality ):

𝜌 (𝒓 ) = ∑ 𝜌 𝑖 (𝒓 )

> 𝑁 𝑒
> 𝑖 =1

= ∑|𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 )|2

> 𝑁 𝑒
> 𝑖 =1

∫ 𝑑 𝒓 𝜌 𝑖 (𝒓 ) = 1

(2.1 .2)

where the integral is over the extent of the system. The orbitals are solutions of the Kohn -Sham 

equation 21 

(− 1

2 ∇2 + 𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝒓 )) 𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 ) ≡ 𝐻 ̂𝐾𝑆 𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 ) = 𝜖 𝑖 𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 )

(2.1 .3) 

where  𝜖 𝑖  are orbital energies (giving rise to band structure ) and  𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝒓 ) is the Kohn -Sham 

effective potential that incorporates, besides Coulombic interactions, a term accounting for Page 6 of 54 

exchange and correlation – the exchange -correlation functional  𝑉 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] = 𝛿 𝐸 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 ] 

> 𝛿𝜌 (𝒓 )

– that 

makes  𝜌 (𝒓 ) of Eq. ( 2.1 .2) equal to the true electron density of the physical system :

𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝒓 ) = ∑ 𝑍 𝑖 

|𝒓 − 𝑹 𝑖 |

> 𝑁 𝑎
> 𝑖 =1

+ ∫ 𝜌 (𝒓 ′)𝑑 𝒓 ′

|𝒓 − 𝒓 ′| + 𝑉 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] ≡ 𝑉 𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑉 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑒𝑒 + 𝑉 𝑋𝐶 

(2.1 .4) 

As the exact form of  𝑉 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 ] (or  𝐸 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 ])) is not known, its approximation constitutes a major 

accuracy limitation (regardless of computational cost) and has been subject to much research 

that resulted in a large number of available XC functionals that offer different trade -offs and 

are attractive for different applications. The KS equation is solved b y representing the orbitals 

in a basis {𝜃 𝑘 (𝒓 )} and converting the KS differential equation into a matrix eigenvalue 

problem: 

𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 ) = ∑ 𝑐 𝑖𝑘 𝜃 𝑘 (𝒓 )

> 𝑁 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑠
> 𝑘 =1

𝑯𝒄 = 𝜖 𝑺𝒄 

𝑯 𝒊𝒋 = ⟨𝜃 𝑗 (𝒙 )|𝐻 ̂𝐾𝑆 |𝜃 𝑖 (𝒙 )⟩

𝑺 𝒊𝒋 = ⟨𝜃 𝑗 (𝒙 )|𝜃 𝑖 (𝒙 )⟩

(2.1 .5) 

This step is the major computational bottleneck of KS DFT that is responsible for the cubic 

scaling of computational cost with large CPU cost prefactors , which makes it impractical to do 

calculations beyond about O(10 3) atoms unless specialized methods and additional 

approximations are used .22 –26 This bottleneck can be said to be computational since with certain 

type of basis functions (in particular, plane waves) , uniform convergence of the basis expansion 

is achievable . A real space grid can also be used. 27 Other popular types of basis sets, in 

particular more CPU -efficient LCOA (l inear combination of atomic orbitals )-like bases and 

contracted bases used, in particular, in large -scale calculations ,24,28 also pose a basis 

optimization problem and therefore an accuracy limitation that could be addressed with ML .

These basis functions can be numeric rather than analytic. 22 As  𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝒓 ) depends on the density, 

the KS equation is solved self -consistently, and the number of self -consistent field (SCF) cycles 

and their convergence can constitute a numeric bottleneck. On ce the KS equation is solved, the 

energy is expressed as Page 7 of 54 

𝐸 = 1

2 ∑ ∫ 𝑑 𝒓 𝜓 𝑖 

> ∗

∇2𝜓 𝑖 

> 𝑁 𝑒𝑙
> 𝑖 =1

+ ∫ 𝑑 𝒓 𝑉 𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝒓 )𝜌 (𝒓 ) + 1

2 ∫ 𝜌 (𝒓 ′)𝜌 (𝒓 )𝑑 𝒓 𝑑 𝒓 ′

|𝒓 − 𝒓 ′| + 𝐸 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 ]

≡ 𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 + 𝐸 𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝐸 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 + 𝐸 𝑋𝐶 

= ∑ 𝜖 𝑖 

> 𝑁 𝑒
> 𝑖 =1

− 𝐸 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 + 𝐸 𝑋𝐶 − ∫ 𝛿 𝐸 𝑋𝐶 [𝜌 (𝒓 )]

𝛿𝜌 (𝒓 ) 𝜌 (𝒓 )𝑑 𝒓 

(2.1 .6)

In the case of periodic system, the KS equation is solved at different points in the Brillouin 

zone (i.e. points sampling it), and Eq. (2.1 .6) is integrated over Brillouin zone (with sampling 

points serving as quadrature grid) .

Eq. ( 2.1 .1) expresses orbital -free DFT. Minimization of E with respect to electron density 

under an approximation for  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] can be done with linear scaling and with small CPU cost 

prefactors, opening a way to routine calculations with ~10 6 atoms. The form of  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] is a 

key accuracy bottleneck, and we will argue below that it also risks becoming a computational 

bottleneck with some ML methods. The search for  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] (also called universal functional) 

is greatly facilitated by the vast experience of KS DFT development and application. 

Specifically, recognizing that (i) only the kinetic energy  𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 = 1 

> 2

∑ ∫ 𝑑 𝒓 𝜓 𝑖 

> ∗

∇2𝜓 𝑖  

> 𝑁 𝑒𝑙
> 𝑖 =1

in Eq. 

(2.1 .6 ) depends on the orbitals , (ii) existing XC functionals are sufficiently accura te (i.e. 

possess practically impactful descriptive and predictive power ) for most classes of materials ,

most OF DFT research represents  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] as 

𝐹 [𝜌 ] = 𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 [𝜌 ] + 𝐸 𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑒 [𝜌 ] + 𝐸 𝑥𝑐 [𝜌 ]

(2.1 .7)

and approximations are constructed for  𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 = ∫ 𝜏 (𝒓 )𝑑 𝒓  , where  𝜏 (𝒓 ) is KS kinetic energy 

density (KED)  𝜏 𝐾𝑆 (𝒓 ) = − 1 

> 2

∑ 𝜓 𝑖 

> ∗

(𝒓 )Δ𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 )𝑁  

> 𝑖 =1

or (most often) its positive -definite version 

𝜏 +(𝒓 ) = 1 

> 2

∑ |∇𝜓 𝑖 (𝒓 )|2𝑁 𝑒𝑙  

> 𝑖 =1

= 𝜏 𝐾𝑆 (𝒓 ) + 1 

> 4

Δ𝜌 (𝒓 ). Approximations for  𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 [𝜌 ] may also include 

neglected correlations in KS kinetic energy.  𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 [𝜌 ] is as of today a major accuracy bottleneck 

preventing widespread use of OF DFT in applications. 

In both KS DFT and OF DFT, it is common to reduce the computational cost by using 

pseudopotentials effectively replacing a real ato m with a pseudoato m containing only a subset 

of the atom’s electrons (valence electrons or more) whose electronic states match those of the 

real atom in the valence region . While for KS DFT, accurate (providing chemical accuracy )Page 8 of 54 

non -local , angular -momentum dependent , pseud izat ion schemes are available ,29 –32 OF DFT 

requires local pseudopotentials whose optimization poses an accuracy limitation. An important 

advantage of the pseudopotentials is th e simplification of treatment of heavy atoms, whereby 

relativistic effects can be partially accounted for by the pseudopotential .33 Pse udopotentials can 

effectively account for relativistic effects on atomic energy levels and contraction/expansion 

effects on the distribution of valence electrons , and obviate the need for a direct treatment of 

relativistic effects within DFT , i.e. solving the Dirac -Kohn -Sham equations 34 

The above -described ground state DFT provides a basis for the calculation of optical 

(electronic excitation) spectra with different methods , including dipole approximation often 

used in solid state DFT, 35 Casida -type linear response ,36,37 and real -time TD (time -dependent) 

DFT .38 In the absence of orbitals, real -time TD  OF -DFT can be performed based on time 

evolution of the electron density. 39,40  Recently, a Casida -like approach was also introduced for 

OF -DFT 41  based on a mapping between the real system of interacting fermions and a fictitious 

system of noninteracting bosons with corresponding single -particle wavefunctions .

2.2 Brief summary of nuclear DFT 

DFT for the nuclear problem aims to describe finite nuclei and nuclear matter in terms of one -

body nucleonic densities rather than the full many -nucleon wave function. In contrast to 

electronic DFT under the Born -Oppenheimer approximation, there is no external potential 

generated by clamped heavy particles. 7 A nucleus is a self -bound system, and the relevant 

density is therefore the intrinsic density, i.e., the density defined with respect to the nuclear 

center of mass. 42 

The energy is written as a functional of neutron density and proton density (energy density 

functional, EDF) , i.e.,  𝐸 𝑡𝑜𝑡 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ], which consists of kinetic energy part, nuclear interaction 

part, and Coulomb part, 

𝐸 𝑡𝑜𝑡 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] = 𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] + 𝐸 𝑖𝑛𝑡 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] + 𝐸 𝐶𝑜𝑢 [𝜌 𝑝 ]

(2.2 .1) 

The neutron and proton densities satisfy the particle -number constraints ,

∫ 𝜌 𝑛 (𝒓 )d𝒓 = 𝑁 , ∫ 𝜌 𝑝 (𝒓 )d𝒓 = 𝑍 

(2.2 .2) Page 9 of 54 

Similar to electronic DFT, n uclear d ensity functional theory suffers from the unknown exact 

form of the functional, including both kinetic and interaction parts. The unknown exact form 

of kinetic energy density functional necessitates the use of auxiliary single -particle orbitals, i.e., 

the Kohn -Sham scheme similar to electronic DFT . This elevates computational cost and 

restricts applications to heavy nuclear systems, such as superheavy nuclei and the inner crust 

of neutron stars. The lack of a known interaction functional leads to reliance on 

phenomenological constructions, which in troduces model dependence and theoretical 

uncertainties. 

The interaction part  𝐸 𝑖𝑛𝑡 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] represents the contribution of the effective nuclear 

interaction to the total energy. In practical nuclear DFT, its explicit form is not unique. It can 

be constructed from different classes of nuclear energy density functionals . In practical 

Sky rme -,43,44 Gogny -,45,46 or covariant 8,47 EDF calculations, this Hamiltonian contains central, 

effective -mass, and spin -orbit terms . For simplicity, and only as an illustrative example of a 

nonrelativistic EDF, we take  𝐸 𝑖𝑛𝑡 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] to be a simplified Skyrme -type functional , as used in 

Ref. 48 : omitting spin -orbit, Coulomb, and pairing terms, and combining the neutron and proton 

densities into the total nucleon density  𝜌 (𝒓 ), the interaction energy reads 

𝐸 int [𝜌 (𝒓 )] = ∫ (3

8 𝑡 0𝜌 2 + 1

16 𝑡 3𝜌 2+𝛾 ) 𝑑 𝒓 + ∫ 1

64 (9𝑡 ₁ − 5𝑡 ₂ − 4𝑡 ₂ 𝑥 ₂)(∇𝜌 )² 𝑑 𝒓 ,

(2.2 .3) 

where  𝑡 0, 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, 𝑡 3, 𝑥 2, and  𝛾  are the so -called Skyrme parameters , which need to be determined 

by empirical fitting to the properties of finite nuclei and the nuclear matter equation of state 

(the reason the parameters are carried separately in Eq. ( 2.2 .3) and not lumped together is 

because they have different meanings in the full equation accounting for neutrons and protons 

separately, e.g. see Eq s. (10 -12) in Ref. 43 ). The functional derivative of Eq. ( 2.2 .3 ) reads 

𝛿 𝐸 𝑖𝑛𝑡 [𝜌 ]

𝛿𝜌 = 3

4 𝑡 0𝜌 + 2 + 𝛾 

16 𝑡 3𝜌 1+𝛾 − 1

32 (9𝑡 1 − 5𝑡 2 − 4𝑡 2𝑥 2)Δ𝜌 ,

(2.2 .4) 

which serves as the effective potential in the Kohn -Sham equation and constitutes the gradient 

descent term in the orbital -free framework. 

In the Kohn -Sham formulation of nuclear DFT, the densities are represented by auxiliary 

single -nucleon orbitals. For each nucleon species  𝑞 = 𝑛 , 𝑝  , one writes schematically (we 

neglect partial occupancies without loss of generality) Page 10 of 54 

𝜌 𝑞 (𝒓 ) = ∑

> 𝑖

|𝜑 𝑖𝑞 (𝒓 )|2, 𝑞 = 𝑛 , 𝑝 ,

(2.2 .3) 

Minimization of the EDF with respect to the orbitals leads to self -consistent single -particle 

equations, 

ℎ𝑞 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ]𝜑 𝑖𝑞 (𝒓 ) = 𝜀 𝑖𝑞 𝜑 𝑖𝑞 (𝒓 ), 𝑞 = 𝑛 , 𝑝 

(2.2 .4) 

The effective Hamiltonian  ℎ𝑞  is generated from the functional derivatives of the EDF. In 

contrast to electronic DFT, it does not contain a fixed external potential from clamped nuclei. 

Instead, it represents a self -consistent nuclear mean field that effectively encodes the strong 

int eraction, the proton Coulomb interaction, and other correlations included in the chosen 

interaction EDF. In practice, it is solved by starting from trial densities or orbitals, constructing 

ℎ𝑞 , solving the single -particle equation, updating the densities, and iterating until convergence ,

similarly as is done in electronic DFT . The se cycles contribute to the CPU cost of nuclear DFT. 

The orbitals may be represented as basis expansions , similarly to electronic DFT . Often -used 

bases include spherical harmonic expansions with radial components expanded over harmonic 

oscillator functions 49 or Woods -Saxon basis ( solutions in the Woods -Saxon potential ).50 –52 

Three -dimensional lattice methods can also be used .53,54 Harmonic -oscillator bases are 

compact and efficient for most bound nuclei, Woods -Saxon bases are numeric bases that better 

capture the tail behavior in the nuclei surface and that are useful for weak bound nuclei with 

continuum effects, whereas coordinate -space methods are especially useful for large 

deformations, fission, and time -dependent dynamics. 

The KS framework has been very successful for the studies of both nuclea r structures and 

nuclear reactions. Its cost, however, is dominated by solving self -consistent single -particle 

equations. This becomes expensive in three -dimensional calculations, shape -constrained 

calculations, superheavy nuclei calculations, and also the time -dependent calculations , where 

the KS equations must be solved many times. Note that shape -constrained calculations are 

common in nuclear physics because they map the nuclear energy as a function of collective 

deformation coordinates, thereby enabling the study of equilibrium shapes, shape coexistence, 

fission barriers, and large -amplitude collective motion. This is very different from electronic 

DFT where three -dimensional (3D ) calculations on real compounds are standard .Page 11 of 54 

Orbital -free nuclear DFT returns to the density -only form of Eq. ( 2.2 .1). The total energy 

is minimized directly with respect to  𝜌 𝑛  and  𝜌 𝑝 , without introducing auxiliary orbitals. The 

variational condition is 

𝛿 

𝛿 𝜌 𝑞 (𝒓 ) {𝐸 tot [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ] − ∑ 𝜇 𝑞 

> 𝑞 =𝑛 ,𝑝

∫ 𝜌 𝑞 (𝒓 )d𝒓 } = 0, 𝑞 = 𝑛 , 𝑝 

(2.2 .5) 

where  𝜇 𝑞 𝑠  are Lagrange multiplier s ensuring the conservation of the total particle number . If 

accurate density functionals were available, this formulation would avoid the solution of large 

eigenvalue problems and could scale much more favorably with system size . It is very attractive 

for cases where computations become demanding in the Kohn -Sham scheme, such as 

superheavy nuclei, or nuclear matter in the inner crust of neutron stars. The central difficulty 

of nuclear OF -DFT is the construction of kinetic -energy functional  𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 [𝜌 𝑛 , 𝜌 𝑝 ].

Time -dependent density functional theory (TD -DFT) provides a microscopic framework 

for describing nuclear excitations and collective dynamics .55 –58 Note that in the small -

amplitude limit around a static EDF minimum, TD -DFT reduces to the random -phase 

approximation (RPA). The excitation energies and transition amplitudes can then be obtained 

from the linear -response equation. The Casida approach in ele ctronic TD -DFT and the RPA 

method in nuclear physic s59,60 are formally analogous linear -response formulations: both arise 

from the small -amplitude limit of time -dependent DFT equations .

The above formalism intentionally suppresses several standard extensions. In realistic 

open -shell calculations, the EDF may also depend on kinetic, spin -current, current, and pairing 

densities . Considering p airing density will change the KS -like equations into Hartree -Fock -

Bogoliubov (HFB) quasiparticle equations .61 This is essential for quantitative nuclear surveys, 

but it does not alter the KS/OF distinction emphasized here: KS/HFB formulations use 

auxiliary orbitals or quasiparticles, whereas OF nuclear DFT seeks a density -only functional. 

Finally, covariant DFT is a distinct but also widely used formulation. 8,62,63 It imposes 

Lorentz covariance and describes nucleons as Dirac particles moving in self -consistent scalar 

and vector fields, usually generated from meson -exchange or point -coupling Lagrangians. This 

structure naturally produces large spin -orbit splitting values and provides a compact relativistic 

description of nuclear saturation. 64 The formalism is therefore different: the KS -like equation 

becomes a Dirac equation, and the functional depends on covariant densities such as scalar 

density, vector density, baryon current, etc. Its time -dependent extension, usually referred to as Page 12 of 54 

time -dependent covariant density functional theory (TD -CDFT), applies the same covariant 

framework to nuclear dynamics and collective excitations. In TD -CDFT, the nucleonic Dirac 

spinors evolve in time under time -dependent scalar and vector fields, so that both the densities 

and the covariant currents become time dependent. It provides the relativistic counterpart of 

nonrelativistic nuclear TD -DFT/TDHF and has been used to describe giant resonances, 

collective vibrations, an d large -amplitude nuclear dynamics. 65 –70 An OF reduction of covariant 

DFT would thus need to preserve this scalar -vector structure rather than simply reuse the 

nonrelativistic kinetic -energy functional. Building OF covariant DFT remains an open question, 

with only very few exploratory attempts reported so far. 71 

2.3 Key conceptual similar ities and differences of import ance to the use of ML for electronic 

and nuclear problems 

2.3.1 Conceptual similarities and differences 

DFT for the electron s and nucle i bear many similarities. This is natural , as the very concept of 

DFT is the same, i.e., the Hohenberg -Kohn theorem is not restricted to specific particles or 

interactions, and therefore the governing equations used in both fields are similar . Computing 

energy as the functional of the density, representing the density as a sum of single particles 

densities that are in turn viewed as squares of single particles wavefunctions (orbitals) , solving 

equations for the orbitals (KS equation s) in a bas is, updating the densities and orbitals in self -

consistency cycles – all these ingredients are similar. In both electronic and nuclear DFT one 

uses the concept of a system of non -interacting particles where effects of interactions among 

particles are included in a density functional . Time evolution of the density for TD DFT can 

also be done similarly in electronic and nuclear DFT , also in the case of OF -DFT. 39,40,72 

A key conceptual difference is that electronic interactions are well -known (Coulombic) 

and serve as direct input to DFT, and th e nature of correlation is well understood . In contrast, 

nucleon s are composite partic les to begin with (e.g. quark structure is ignored) so that a

nucleon -nucleon interaction is already an intricate construct ; nuclear ab initio theories only 

serve as guidance to the develop ment of nuclear interaction and many -body theories . As a result, 

reliable electronic XC functionals can be derived ab initio , i.e. electron ic DFT can be ab in itio 

even though empirically tuned functionals are also widely use d, while current nuclear DFT 

functional s are empirical , as exemplified by the Skyrme functional parameters in Eq. ( 2.2 .3 );

many more parameters are often used than those in Eq. ( 2.2 .3 ). This differen ce affects how ML 

has been used in electronic and nuclear DFT: in e lectronic DFT there is vibrant field of ML XC Page 13 of 54 

functionals aiming to build ML models of an existing (albeit exactly unknown) XC functional 

(see section  3.1 ), and beyond the construction of ML models mimicking existing approximate 

XC functionals, ML has been used to surpass them in accuracy or to approach the accuracy of 

wavefunction -based methods that serve as the reference because the underlying interactions 

are exactly known and are not subject to discovery . No direct equivalent of this field has 

emerged in nuclear DFT. ML or AI models that discover better expressions of basic interactions 

are still in the future. On the other hand , the way ML is used in OF DFT is quite similar in 

electronic and nuclear DFT, whereby one builds ML models approximating the non -interacting 

KEF of the KS system. Gradient expansions 73 are used in both fields as models to compare to .

In electronic DFT, one also often use s terms of up to 4 th order gradient expansion as features .

A visual summary o f main similarities and differences between electronic and nuclear DFT in 

Kohn -Sham and orbital -free paradigms as well as of opportunities for ML/AI methods to 

improve them that are considered below is offered in  Figure 1.Page 14 of 54 

Figure 1. A visual summary of main similarities and differences between electronic and 

nuclear DFT in Kohn -Sham and orbital -free paradigms as well as of opportunities for 

ML/AI methods to improve them. 

Key differences thus stem from a very different nature of particles and inter -particle 

interactions involved . An obvious difference is the need to consider both neutron and proton 

densities in nuclear DFT, corresponding to two isospin projections of the nucleon, vs. electron 

density in electronic DFT . The most important differences, including those that affect how ML 

can or should be deployed, however, stem from a different nature of interactions. In the 

electronic problem, electron s interact via Coulombic interactions only (and, respectively ,

electron density interacts with itself Coulombically) . The electron density is optimized in the 

“external” potential due to point -wise nuclear core charges, and this potential is Coulombic and 

therefore divergent. This gives rise to issues not present in nuclear DF T. The divergent nature 

of the Coulombic potential leads to a wavefunction cusp on top of the nucleus. 74 The cusp is Page 15 of 54 

difficult to model : when using a plane wave basis (naturally used in most solid state 

calculations), an impractically large plane wave cutoff energy would be required . When using 

instead basis functions mimicking electronic states of the atoms (LCAO, linear combination of 

atomic orbitals, type bases - such bases are most often used in molecular and sometimes used 

in solid state calculations) , Slater type functions would naturally allow modeling the cusp , but 

for computational expediency in the commonly used variational approach (i.e. matrix elements 

of Eq. ( 2.1 .5)) , Gaussian -like radial functions are used instead, increasing the basis size. 

Optimization of LCAO -type basis functions is an important issue, that can also be addressed 

by ML. Collocation allows using Slater -like functions directly , in which case basis function as 

well as collocation point placement optimization needs to be addressed. 75,76 Gaussian -type and 

Slater -type bases result in non -identity overlap matrices that may become ill -conditioned. In 

nuclear DFT , the situation is different. There is no fixed external potential generated by 

clamped point charges, and therefore no Coulombic singularity or nuclear analogue of the 

electronic cusp. Nuclei are self -bound systems, and the confining mean field is generated by 

the nucleons themselves through an effective EDF. The strong interaction is short -ranged, 

saturating, spin - and isospin -dependent, and includes tensor, spin -orbit, and many -body effects, 

which are usually encoded in Skyrme, Gogny, or covariant function als. As a result, the main 

numerical challenges are not related to resolving a singular potential, but to describing self -

bound densities, nuclear surfaces and tails, deformation, shell effects, pairing, and isovector 

dependence. 6 Harmonic -oscillator bases (used for the radial component of a spherical 

harmonics expansion) are compact and widely used for finite nuclei, while Woods -Saxon bases 

or coordinate -space grids with lattice representations are often preferable for weak binding 

nuclei with continuum effects, which are more suitable for large -deformed and fission 

config urations. While t he use of a spherical harmonic expansion is similar to the electronic 

DFT (LCAO -type bases) , in electronic DFT , LCAO -type basis functions are located on each 

atom (and sometimes even between atoms), whi le a single center is used in nuclear DFT. With 

a single center basis set, significant nucle ar shape deformations and fission are not well 

represented, and one tends to use grid representation for such cases instead. In electronic DFT, 

harmonic oscillator basis functions have been used to generate a discrete variable 

representation 77 basis in which the KS equation is solved , in Ref. 78 . With a single center, the 

orthometric nature of harmonic and Woods -Saxon basis functions results in an identity overlap 

matrix, while in electronic DFT, the multicenter nature of the LCAO basis with Gaussian -like 

radial components require s dealing with the overlap matrix . Basis shape optimization is usually Page 16 of 54 

not considered in nuclear DFT , although may have potential to reduce the CPU cost of nuclear 

DFT calculations. 

The Coulombic potential of ion cores supports core electrons that do not participate in 

chemical bonding and valence electrons that do . One often replaces the Coulombic potential of 

ion core with a smooth pseudopotential (PP) that support s only valence and sometimes some 

of the core electrons and is such that valence electron -derived properties (bond length, charge 

donation, vibrational and optical spectra , band structure of valence electrons and unoccupied 

bands, etc. ) are the same as with the true core potential . The c onstruction of a pseudopotential 

is an important optimization problem addressable by ML . The role of the pseudopotential is 

critical in OF -DFT where it allows avoiding dealing with rapidly changing core density, which 

is difficult with most KEFs. Highly a ccura te PPs are typically angular momentum dependent 

(so -called non -local) and cannot be used in OF -DFT Construction of PPs usable with OF -DFT 

is an important optimization problem addressable with ML that is not present in nuclear DFT; 

however, similar methods could be adapted for building nuclear effective potentials . Another 

issue not present in nuclear DFT is sampling of the Brillouin zone and calculations of the band 

structure (dispersion relations) . In nuclear DFT, there is no direct analogue of electronic core -

valence separation, pseudopotentials, Brillouin -zone sampling, or band -structure calculations. 

Nuclei are self -organized systems with all nucleons participating in the self -bound mean field, 

while the unresolved short -range and high -momentum physics of nuclear interactions are 

absorbed into effective EDFs. As a result, ML -addressable problems instead mainly relate to 

EDF optimization. 

2.3.2 Different quantitative criteria in the two fields 

Because the type of application is very different between electronic and nuclear DFT, 

quantitative accuracy criteria for DFT calculations are not directly comparable between the two 

fields . In the case of electronic DFT, one often talks about “chemical accuracy” , typically 

understood as energy accuracy on the order of a mHa per mol or o n the order of 10 meV per 

mol . In practice, however, this criterion is not directly useful. DFT calculations are most often 

required to produce accurate structures of molecules, solids or interfaces, interaction energies, 

band edges and band structures (densities of states and dispersion in the Brillouin zone for 

periodic systems) , vibrational and electronic spectra, as well as spatial distributions of 

electronic states (orbitals) that are important, in particular, for electronic coupling and oscillator 

strength calculations . Stru ctures typically need to be accurate on the order of 1% for bond Page 17 of 54 

length s and unit cell vectors and 1 0 for angles. The required accuracy of interaction energies 

depends on the application , with 10 meV rarely achievable in many applications . For example, 

adsorption energies of molecules on catalytic surfaces or ion -host interaction energies in solid 

state ionics applications are rarely accurate to better than 0.1 eV . An illustration of this level of 

accuracy are difficulties that DFT has of accurately predict ing relative phase energies .79,80 

When computing potential energy surfaces (PES) , an accuracy of relative energies between 

different configurations on the order of 1 meV or less is needed – and is achievable – around 

the equilibrium geometry for accurate vibrational spectra; an accuracy on the order of 10 -100 

meV is mor e common for reactive PES over wide energy and geometry range s. Accuracy of 

band edges is on the order of 0.1 eV with hybrid functionals, while with GGA (generalized 

gradient approximation) functionals most often used for extended systems , the band gap is 

underestimated by a whopping 1/3 without preventing the use of such calculations for relative 

comparison of band structures , e.g. for band alignment in devices . Errors in fundamental 

frequencies in vibrational spectra , and therefore in the curvature of the PES at equilibrium 

geometry , are typically on the order of a few %, and errors in electronic excitation energies are 

on the order of 0.1 eV only when optimal functionals are used for the type of excitation 

considered , and much higher otherwise. The above accuracy ballparks are for standard, not 

ML -enhanced, DFT, and they are indicative of what ML -enhanced methods need to beat or to 

achieve while offering other advantages such as better speed of calculation or better accuracy 

for parts of chemical space than non -ML -enhanced DFT .

In nuclear DFT, the accuracy criteria are different and observable -dependent. Binding 

energies, separation energies, charge radii, deformations, fission barriers, collective excitations, 

and nuclear -matter properties are all relevant. Global EDF optimizati ons typically tolerate 

errors of around 2 MeV in total binding energies and about 0.0 3 fm in charge radii. 51 Shell gaps, 

fission barriers , and single -particle splittings often demand sub -MeV to about several MeV 

accuracy .81 Collective excitation energies are commonly accurate only at the level of several 

hundred keV to a few MeV. 82 Nuclear potential energy surfaces (energy change as a function 

of nuclear shape) need to be accurate on the order of 10 -1 MeV. Thus, there is no single nuclear 

analogue of “chemical accuracy.” For ML -enhanced nuclear DFT, the goal is instead to 

improve the accuracy of the target observables, reduce the computational cost of large -scale 

EDF calculations, provide reliable uncertaint y estimates, and ensure a controlled description 

of the relevant physical effects for the problem under consideration. While , depending on the 

purpose of the calculation, different measures of accuracy are used within each electronic and 

nuclear DFT, overall one can say that electronic DFT has more stringent requirements on Page 18 of 54 

relative energy accuracy in most applications : interaction energies that need to be accurate on 

the order of 10 -3-10 -1 eV are compute d from differences in total energies that are often on the 

order of 10 3-10 6 eV . In nuclear DFT, relative accuracy on the order of 10 -1-10 0 MeV is needed 

while total binding energies are on the order of 10 3 MeV . The relative energies, e.g., energy 

differences between different chemical compositions, isomers, phases or between different 

geometries in electronic DFT, and accurate relative binding energies between different nuclei 

or between different shapes of a nuc leus in nuclear DFT, are usually the quantity of interest 

rather than absolute total energies. High relative energy accuracy can be achieved either with 

models embedding error cancellation - which is an important advantage of physics -informed 

analytic mode ls - or with very high absolute energy accuracy without error cancellation. As 

major ML methods by themselves do not incorporate error cancellation, th e relatively milder 

relative error requirements in in ground -state energies of nuclear DFT applications create an 

opportunity for ML -enhanced nuclear DFT to be adopted for applied calculations sooner th an

electronic DFT for which the higher relative accuracy requirements may be harder to achieve .

This concerns especially OF -DFT where a ML KEF needs to accurately model a significant 

fraction of the total energy as opposed to, e.g. the XC component only . Alternatively, 

development of physically -motivated ML models that can embed error cancellation is desired 

(as opposed to using off -the -shelf ML methods as is). 

# 3 Key computational and accuracy bottlenecks that can be addressed with 

# ML and AI methods 

We now consider applications of ML and ultimately AI methods to improve the accuracy and 

or CPU cost of DFT calculations, b y applying ML/AI methods to compute energy density 

functionals, electron or nucleon density, to improve basis completeness or accelerate 

convergence . What foll ows is not an overview of ML -enhanced DFT , but rather a comparative 

assessment of promising ML/AI methods for different kinds of DFT: electron and nucle ar ,

Kohn -Sham and orbital -free. We note that reviews of ML uses for enhancing particular flavors 

of DFT have been appearing, mostly for electronic DFT, and the reader can refer to them for 

wider context. 83 –89 In particular, relatively recent reviews of ML XC functionals 88 and ML -

enhanced electronic OF -DFT 83 can be recommended. There are no dedicated reviews of ML -

enhanced nuclear DFT; for a review of ML in nuclear physics , the reader can refer to Ref. 90 .Page 19 of 54 

3.1 Density f unctionals and related quantities 

In electronic DFT, ML functionals are typically b uilt to represent the exchange correlation 

functional 91 –105 (XC energy or energy density , often as enhancement factors to existing 

functionals; or XC or KS potential 106 –112 ), the kinetic energy or KED functional 113 –126 (directly, 

via its functional derivative i.e. Pauli potential  𝑣 𝑃 = 𝛿 𝐸 𝑘𝑖𝑛 

> 𝛿𝜌 (𝒓 )

,125,127 –129 or related quantities 123 ), or 

the universal functional  𝐹 [𝜌 (𝒓 )] (Eq . ( 2.1 .1)) .130 The field of ML functionals exists because 

existing formulaic analytic functionals are insufficient. There exist a large number 

(hundreds 131 ) of XC functionals finding use in applied electronic DFT calculations , from 

multiple GGA functionals used in most solid -state simulations to multiple global and range -

separated hybrid functionals used in most molecular simulations to meta -GGA functionals .

This diversity reflects the fact that there is no single functional providing simultaneously 

practically sufficient accuracy of structures , band structures, and opt ical properties for most 

materials , but different types of functionals do provide practically relevant accuracy of specific 

properties. Even then, the accuracy is often semi -quantitative, so a quest for ML XC functionals 

can be justified on both the accuracy and chemical space coverage grounds . Another use of ML 

XC which may become more important going forward with the advent of more accurate KEFs 

is using an ML XC to mimic hybrid (i.e. orbital -dependent) XC functionals in an orbital -

independent way. 95,102 

The issue of accuracy and chemical space coverage is much more severe in OF -DFT , as 

available formulaic functionals only reliably provide near -KS DFT accuracy for simple 

metals. 132 –138 While XC functionals need to reproduce an important but relatively small part of 

total energy, KEFs must accurately reproduce a much more significant part of total energy. As 

ML methods typically do not exhibit error cancellation behavior of physically -motivated 

models (when computing interaction energies) , this results in accuracy requirements that are 

much higher than those for other ML applications (such as materials informatics or interatomic 

potentials) . For example, Ref. 119 demonstrated that correlation coefficients between predicted 

and ground truth values as high as 0.9999 for the ML functional to correctly (semi -

quantitatively) reproduce energy -volume curves of several hundred compounds. 

For nuclear DFT, the field of ML functionals has so far focused mainly on KEFs. 139 –142 

Traditional nuclear orbital -free approaches have mainly been based on semiclassical Thomas -

Fermi or extended Thomas -Fermi approximations, which can describe average bulk properties 

but do not naturally reproduce quantum shell effects and deformation effects .4,5,143 This is a 

particularly severe issue in nuclei, because shell structure, spin -orbit effects, and deformation Page 20 of 54 

are central to binding energies, radii, and potential -energy surfaces. To incorporate the shell 

and deformation effects, additional corrections must be applied, 144,145 which would however 

involve the auxiliary one -body orbits again and are no longer orbital -free DFTs. Note that a 

recent study 48 shows that nuclear shell effects can be incorporated by introducing a nonlocal 

kinetic energy density functional, whose nucleon localization functions reproduce the shell -

related fluctuations obtained from Kohn -Sham calculations. 

The state of the art of ML KEF in nuclear OF DFT allows reproducing nuclear potential 

energy surfaces, i.e., total energy as a functional of nuclei deformation, as demonstrated in 

Figure 2 reproduced from Ref. 142 . This issue is conceptually similar to the requirement for the 

KEF in electronic DFT to reproduce the shape of the potential energy surface, an issue that was 

problematic for a long time 78,146 and is now being effectively resolved with ML KEFs for many 

molecules and solids .114,118,119,126,147 

Figure 2. Potential energy curves of 16 O nucleus computed with KS DFT and with OF 

DFT using an ML functional in Ref. 142 , as a function of the quadrupole deformation 

parameter 2. Results from Thomas –Fermi and extended Thomas –Fermi (up to the 4th Page 21 of 54 

order gradient expansion ) models are also provided for comparison . Reproduced from 

Ref. 142 under Creative Commons BY -NC -ND 4.0 license . (c) 2025 The Authors. 

ML functionals could be categorized as pure density functionals that use only density 

functionals -dependent features, and functionals that also use features encoding the structure. 

In the case of electronic DFT such features would encode chemical composition and structure, 

in the case of nuclear DFT , this would correspond to using information about the nucle ar shape; 

use of N and Z as “composition” features 148 would not make an ML functional “impure” as 

those themselves are determined by the (integral of the respective nucleons’ ) density. With ML 

functionals that depend on the density as well as on structure , the resulting calculation can be 

viewed as a hybrid between DFT and a n ML interatomic potentia l (force field ), as force fields ,

both ML and formulaic, predict energy in function of structure and may also carry a model of 

electron density .149,150 As density featurization in electronic DFT is often done using basis sets 

that include functions (such as Gaussian functions) localized on atoms, most ML functionals 

(including practically all recently proposed XC functionals) include structural information as 

their inputs and ar e thus not pure density functionals. 

Although the first known XC functional used a single hidden later NN with only 8 

neurons, 112 and the second known ML XC functional used a single hidden later NN with only 

3 neurons, 99 recently, often complex large NNs , came to dominate ML functionals in electronic 

DFT . A Behler –Parrinello type neural network - an NN architecture originally developed for 

interatomic potentials 151,152 - was used to fit the XC functional in Ref. 95 and showed better 

results than common functionals such as PBE, SCAN, B97M -V for small polyatomic 

molecules . A transformer NN was used in R ef. 91 to learn nonlocal XC functionals mimicking 

r2SCAN and TPSS meta -GGA functionals and allowing accurate automatic differentiation .153 

A fully connected three - hidden layer, 300 neurons NN was used in Ref. 96 to fit an enhancement 

factor to SCAN functional, achieving an accuracy somewhat higher than SCAN for several 

materials (including C, Si, InP, MgO, and MgS) . A fully connected three -hidden layer, 300 

neurons NN was used in Ref. 97 for a meta -GGA functional. A similar size NN was used in Ref. 

> 154

. 400 neurons in 2 hidden layers were used in Ref. 101 . Ref. 155 used 1200 neurons in 4 hidden 

layers . A fully connected NN with 10 layer s and 512 or 1024 neurons per layer was used in 

Ref. 105 , which offered a generic software tool for fitting ML functionals in the form of a 

weighted sum of energy densities (of other known functionals ), where the (space -dependents) 

weights are machine -learned . The DM21 94 functional has a similar form. A CNN was used to 

ML the XC potential in Ref. 111 , slightly outperforming B3LYP for H 2, HeH + and He 2.Page 22 of 54 

Exchange correlation potential was machine -learned in Ref. 106 with a relatively large NN even 

in 1D (2 hidden layers with 300 nodes) with ReLU . While the use of ReLU neurons (which 

has been used in several works) is attractive from the perspective of computational expedience ,

we would warn about its discontinuous nature, which leads to larger NN and derivative 

discontinuities. Equivariant GNNs was used in Ref. 103 to make an XC functional approaching 

CCSD(T) accuracy on MD17 molecular dataset .156 Density matrix was machine -learned in Ref.  

> 157

using equivariant multihead attention graph neural network for H 2O and CH 4, diamond, and 

graphene. This type of NN was also used in Ref. 158 to machine -learn DFT Hamiltonian matrix 

(testing on H 2O, MoS 2, and Na ); accuracy close to “ traditional ” DFT was obtained for the 

materials considered in these works . An equivariant GNN can have millions of parameters even 

for medium -sized molecules. Physically constrained NNs are often used, for example, in Ref s. 

> 104,105

to ML the XC functional and in Ref. 107 to ML the Hamiltonian and its derivatives used 

to compute the KS potential (in 1D) for TD DFT. Recently, the utility of quantum NN (QNN) 159 

(a type of deep NN suitable for quantum computing) for XC functional representation has been 

demonstrated not only on model sub -dimensional systems but also on real small molecules (H 2,

H4, H 2-H2) achieving mHa accuracy. 92 A kernel regression was used in Ref. 160 with SOAP 161 -

based density encoding to ML the correlation energy (with CCSD(T) correlation as ta rget ) of 

water and hydrocarbon molecules . Note that the use of a second -order polynomial kernel is 

equivalent to a second -order polynomial models, suggesting that relative simplicity of 

underlying functional dependence (between the chosen target and features) . An RBF kernel 

with SOAP -based features was used to ML CCSD(T) correlation in Ref. 162 . Gradient boosted 

decision trees (GBDT) 163 has been explored in a limited way but could obviate disadvantages 

of large NNs. For example, XGBoost 164 was used in Ref. 100 to improve on the PBE functional; 

the authors explicitly stated that XGBoost outperformed NNs in their work and highlight ed the 

unwieldy nature of large NNs. 

As mentioned in section  2.3 , no direct equivalent of the field of ML XC functionals has 

emerged in nuclear DFT, in particular, due to the postulated nature of elementary interactions 

(as opposed to the exactly known Coulombic interactions in electronic DFT). However, this 

creates an opportunity for the use of ML or AI methods to discover better expressions of basic 

or effective nuclear interactions in the future. 

An important difference between the KS and OF approaches is the different relative 

importance of the computational cost of calling the ML model of the functional. In the KS 

paradigm , a major determinant of the CPU cost and its nonlinear scaling with system size is 

the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian matrix. The overhead of the computational cost of Page 23 of 54 

calling an ML model of the XC functional is expected to be not significant. This changes in the 

OF paradigm , where most of the computational cost comes from evaluating the energy 

functional. The recent proliferation of large (excessively large, in the authors’ view) NN models 

indicates a direction that partially defeats the purpose. This is compounded by the fact that ML 

models tend to have worse convergence as their errors are more corrugated that those of 

analytic formulas (which is itself related to complex architectures) , increasing the risk of 

convergence problems in both self -consistency cycles and geometry optimization, as was 

recently convincingly highlighted in in Ref. 165 . As an example, we reproduce in  Figure 5

computational time tests performed in Ref. 165 using of DFT with the analytic hybrid PBE0 and 

machine -learned DM21 94 functionals as well as CCSD(T) (coupled c luster with singles, 

doubles, and perturbative triples , considered as the “golden standard” wavefunction -based ab 

initio method ). The comparison is to a hybrid functional as DM 21 depends on local HF 

exchange energy density, making it a hybrid ML functional. While PBE0 easily beats CCSD(T) 

in computational efficiency already for small systems, DM21 has a higher cost than CCSD(T) 

even in the KS regime ! DM21 demonstrates that as of today ML functional s can compete with 

the best analytic functional and beat them on specific metrics, e.g. DM21 addressed the 

problem of delocalization error in substance. As any ML models, they require training data (e.g. 

more than 4000 molecular structures with main -group elements in the case of DM21) and suffer 

from extrapolation errors / overfitting; this is directly related to the complexity of the 

architecture. Ref. 165 studied how DM21 extrapolates to transition metal chemistry (TMC) and 

concluded that DM21 achieves comparable or occasionally superior accuracy to B3LYP but 

struggles with self -consistent field convergence. On the other hand, Ref. 103 reported more 

favorable CPU time comparison results of their GNN -based functional with several traditional 

functionals including LDA (local density approximation) , hybrid, and meta -GGA functionals ,

whereby the NN functionals were faster than B3LYP or B97X . Interestingly, the CPU time 

comparison in Ref. 103 also included the NN functional of Ref. 104 which used a relatively small 

NN with three hidden layers with 16 neurons each , yet the timing performance of the two was 

by and large similar . Note that efficient GPU (graphic s processing unit) - and TPU (tensor 

processing units) 166 -amendable implementations of complex NN architectures play an 

important role here; the underlying math of GNNs remains compute -heavy. Page 24 of 54 

Figure 3. Computational time tests of DFT with PBE0 and DM21 functionals and 

CCSD(T). The horizontal axis shows the computation time for a single SCF cycle for 

two -atom molecules made of elements from H to Ca (n eutral form and cations ) using 

the cc -pVTZ basis set and an energy tolerance of 10 −9 a.u. using the CCSD(T), while 

the vertical axis shows the DFT computation time of these systems with DM21 and 

PBE0 functionals. 

A similar issue exists with KEFs , where the use of relatively large convolutional NNs ,

GNNs, graphomers etc. has been proliferating 121,126,129,144,147,167 –169 - see Ref. 83 for a more 

comprehensive overview of ML KEFs for electronic OF DFT . While the short -range nature of 

the functional 170,171 (justifiable by the properties of one -electron reduced density matrix 172,173 )

means that the scaling can still be linear with system size for large enough systems, the use of 

oversized ML models increases the CPU cost prefactor. “Lighter” models are therefore 

im portant for OF -DFT. Besides formulas obtained with symbolic regression (see below), one 

can stress the importance of using lighter ML methods. Ref. 116 demonstrated that an NN need 

not be large if fitted with a powerful optimizer (such as Levenberg -Marquard) and with 

physically motivated features such as terms of the gradient expansion: they any needed an 80 -

node ( 20 per hidden later ) NN to reproduce KS KED of Si, Li, Al, and Mg simultaneously; for 

individual materials single hidden layer NNs with only a few neurons were sufficient. Non -NN 

methods such as kernel regressions with which the field of ML KEF largely started first with 

1D models 78,174 and which have been shown to be promising for real materials 117,119,120 can also 

result in lighter models. GBDTs (gradient -boosted decision trees) also deserve to be explored 

for KEFs , especially as available results for ML XC functionals are promising .100 Both kernel -Page 25 of 54 

based and NN -based methods have been applied in nuclear DFT, yet their computational costs 

have not been compared .139,140 

3.1.1 Role of sub -D models in electronic and nuclear DFT 

Sub -dimensional ( one - or two -dimensional ) ML functionals carry different importance in 

electronic and nuclear DFT . In electronic DFT, sub -dimensional models served to explore the 

idea of constructing ML functionals and to test different ML methods and featurization methods 

and to explore way to obtain stable functional derivatives with ML functionals, which is 

important for self -consistent optimization .78,84,106,107,127,130,169,174 –179 They are of very limited 

use to the simulations of real molecules, solids, and interfaces, where a n ML model must deal 

with realistic 3D electron densities. Some ideas explored on sub -dimensional models, such as 

density featurization using grid values or related PCA approaches, 169,174 are difficult to 

infeasible in 3D simulations on real materials . Such sub -dimensional models also used 

simplified analytic synthetic interactions potentials (rather than real atoms’ ). However, we note 

that pseudo -2D models have been quite useful for ultra -large -scale simulations , for example 

DFT based quasicontinuum simulations up to m scale, 180 –182 and sub -dimensional ML 

functionals could be useful for such simulations . This direction is still unexplored. 

In nuclear DFT, however, sub -dimensional models could have a more direct practical 

role. Many realistic nuclear -structure calculations are performed under symmetry restrictions. 

For spherical or near -spherical nuclei, the local densities reduce essentially to radial functions, 

so that a one -dimensional representation can already describe a physically relevant class of 

systems. For axially deformed nuclei, the densities are commonly represented on a two -

dimensional grid. Such reductions are not merely pedago gical simplifications, but are routinely 

used in real calculation such as large -scale nuclear mass -table calculations. 51 Therefore, ML 

functionals trained and tested in one or two dimensions could be connected to bona fide 

applications rather than only to toy model systems. 

3.1.2 Beyond traditional M L

Beyond ML, techniques that could be called AI are still little used to build functionals. 

Symbolic regression has been used in a limited way and presen ts significant potential going 

forward. Automatically constructed formulas have the advantage of CPU cost, easy software 

integration into DFT codes, and interpretability / insight that can be used for further theory 

development. Symbolic regression has been used for XC functionals. In Ref. 93 symbolic Page 26 of 54 

functional evolutionary search was used to recover B97M -V functional as well as to develop 

a new functional that outperformed it on most molecules in Main Group Chemistry Database 

(MGCDB84) .131 The method evolves populations of formulas made from building blocks of 

existing functionals , elementary terms including electron densities and gradients, and 

functional forms of enhancement factors were learned . To illustrate how symbolic functional 

evolution works, we reproduce the workflow of the method in  Figure 4. Genetic evolution ha d

also been used in Ref. 183 , whereby the genome included piece s of known GGA, meta -GGA 

and hybrid XC functionals ; an improved version of the B3PW91 functional was discovered. 

Figure 4. Workflow of the symbolic functional evolution method use to discover XC 

functionals in Ref. 93 . (A) A population of symbolic density functionals is iteratively 

evolved using an evolution algorithm. Each individual in the population represents the 

enhancement factors in a density functional. The performance of a density functional 

is characterized by its fitness, defined as the negative of validation energy error . (B) In 

each iteration, a tournament selection is performed on a subset of individuals sampled 

from the population. (C) The highest -fitness individual in the tournament is selected to 

be the parent. (D) Then, a child functional is generated by randomly pi cking one of the 

enhancement factors and mutating one of its instructions. (E) The child functional is 

then trained on the training set using the covariance matrix adaptation evolution 

strategy (CMA -ES) method to determine its parameters. (F) Last, the fit ness of child 

functional is evaluated on the validation set and then added to the population. After the 

population size exceeds a limit, the oldest individual in the population is removed. For 

simplicity of visualization, a density functional is represente d with only one 

enhancement factor. The general form of density functional considered in this work 

contains three enhancement factors, and in each evolution step, one enhancement factor 

is randomly chosen for mutation . Reproduced from Ref. 93 under Creative Commons 

Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY) . (c) 2022 The Authors. 

Several papers appeared recently on symbolic regression for electronic OF DFT. Ref. 176 

used genetic pro gramming to learn the non -interacting KEF for a 1D system. The method was 

able to discover the von Weizsäcker functional for single -electron systems and approached the Page 27 of 54 

Thomas –Fermi limit for multi -electron systems. Symbolic regression -derived functionals were 

also stable with respect to the functional derivative . Ref. 184 use a physics -inspired symbolic 

regression method to rediscover the TF functional and was used to build a γTF λvW functional 

(where γ and λ are parameters ) tested on H, He +, Li 2+ , He, Be, Ne, Mg, Ar, H2, HF, N 2, CO, O 2,

and F2. As of now, the only example of symbolic regression of an electron density functional 

for real materials beyond TF – vW models is Ref 118 . That work employed the GPR -NN 

method 185 which is effectively a hybrid between NN and GPR and allows analyzing the kind 

of functional dependence of the target function on the features. 186,187 The method is thus easily 

amenable to symbolic regression , and was used in Ref 118 to build the first ML -guided KEF 

formula for real materials. The features were made from the terms of the 4th order gradient 

expansion 73 as well as the product of electron density and K ohn -Sham effective potential ,

𝜌 𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 , which is related to the kinetic potential 125 and is responsible for a significant fraction of 

the variance of kinetic energy density. 117 Excluding , 𝜌 𝑣 𝑒𝑓𝑓 , it was possible to test the approach 

on the recovery of the 4th order gradient expansion , as the model in that case return a gradient 

expansion -like expression with coefficients fitted to a particular dataset (which included 433 

unary, binary, and ternary materials containing Li, Al, Mg, Si, As, Ga, Sb, Na, Sn, and P119 )

and with some nonlinearity applied to the terms of the expansion . The ML model return ed 

physically meaningful relative magnitudes of the terms related to the terms of the gradient 

expansion , demonstrating interpretability .

Symbolic regression still has not been used in nuclear DFT where it offers a promising 

direction of research. Its use in nuclear DFT would nevertheless differ in several respects from 

applications in electronic DFT. In electronic DFT, symbolic regression of the functionals can 

often be guided by the well -defined Coulomb interaction. In nuclear DFT, the energy dens ity 

functional is more complicated and must effectively encode correlations associated with the 

strong interaction and with many -body nuclear dynamics. The relevant variables are also richer: 

in addition to the total nucleon density, one may need to distin guish neutron and proton 

densities, or equivalently isoscalar and isovector densities, and realistic functionals may also 

depend on kinetic, spin -current, current, and pairing densities. Symbolic regression in nuclear 

DFT would have to be constrained not only by finite -nucleus properties, such as binding 

energies, charge radii, deformations , spin -orbit splittings, pairing effects , surface properties, 

etc. , but also by nuclear matter properties, such as the symmetry energy, equation of state , etc .Page 28 of 54 

3.2 Orbital and density representation 

3.2.1 Basis sets for the solution of the Kohn -Sham equation 

We consider here basis sets used to solve the KS equation, i.e. to convert the KS equation into 

a matrix equation . Machine learning of basis functions is done to produce a sufficiently 

complete basis of a small size, thereby reducing the size of the matrices in Eq. ( 2.1 .5). We 

mentioned above similarities and differences between the basis types used in electronic and 

nuclear DFT. In particular, LCAO type bases used in the electronic DFT are multi -center , non -

direct product type , and result in a non -identity overlap matrix which may be badly conditioned 

especially for highly complete bases. The single center nature of the bases often used in nuclear 

DFT which are made from spherical harmonics and orthonorm al radial functions results in a 

direct product basis with an identity overlap matrix. As a key advantage of ML is representation 

of a multivariate function in, effectively, a parameterized non -direct product basis made e.g. 

from neurons of a NN or from kernel functions of a kernel regression (these two methods being 

major regression type ML methods ), this distinction is conceptually important. ML -

optimization of radial functions or of the overall shape (including angular components) does 

not conceptually change the non -direct -product, non -orthonormal nature of the basis in 

electronic DFT while it would in nuclear DFT and could introduce additional difficulties in 

handling non -orthonormality of the basis . The number of basis functions is on the order of 

dozens to hundreds per center in both electronic and nuclear DFT. As it scales with the number 

of atoms , and as the CPU cost of solving the KS equation is cubic in basis size, the basis size 

is a limiting factor in electronic DFT (limiting feasible system sizes), and basis optimization –

either manual or ML -based – is impactful. 

Several works offered approaches to optimize, with the help of ML, basis shapes in 

function of chemical environment for electronic DFT . For example, i n Ref. 188 , LCAO -type 

basis functions were machine -learned using GPR and rotationally invariant descriptors of 

chemical environment that were eigenvalue of the overlap matrix constructed from Gaussians 

located on the target atom and its surrounding atoms. Interestingly, the authors proposed to 

machine -learn not basis parameters directly but parameters of a polarization potential (made 

from Gaussian functions) in an auxiliary atomic Hamiltonian, whose eigenstates were used to 

make basis functions. As a result, a more compact basis set could be used for the same accuracy 

and a more than 50 -fold speedup of calculations vs. standard bases (from single - to triple -zeta 

polarized) was reported on calculations of liquid water. Frames of ab initio MD on a 64 -

molecule model of liquid water were used to acquire training data. A similar approach was used Page 29 of 54 

in Ref. 189 with LASSO regression that was used to fit potential parameters to training set of 

118655 data points produced by coupled cluster calculations o f molecules containing H, B, C, 

N, O, F, Si, P, S, and Cl. Thus optimized double -zeta bas es could produce molecular properties 

(interaction energies and conformational energies, reaction energies, barrier heights, and bond 

separation energies ) with accuracy close to complete basis set wavefunction (i.e. more accurate 

than DFT) methods (i.e. this work had also elements of delta and transfer learning). In Ref. 190 ,

ML was used to optimize parameters of muffin tin orbitals (MTO) 191 – a basis type that is 

LCAO -like in the core region and plane wave -like in the valence region, allowing, in particular, 

efficient full -potential (as opposed to pseudopotential) calculations. The authors used 

covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA -ES) algorithm. Parameters (such as 

atomic sphere radii) were thus fitted to minimize the discrepancy with plane wave calculations. 

In this way, improved band structures for CrTe 2, Si, GaAs, and CrI 3 were obtained. How 

extensive basis set optimization may need to be shows the example of BigDFT code , where, 

starting from an LCAO -like basis, basis functions are expanded in wavelets and optimized to 

minimize total energy , effectively obviating a key downside of LCAO -type bases .28,192 An 

example of the optimized function starting from a p-type Si -centered function, for a hydrogen -

terminated Si nanoparticle, is shown in  Figure 5. Predicting such optimized functions with ML 

would significantly accelerate large -scale DFT calculations. Note that works that ML the DFT 

Hamiltonian matrices ,193,194 do so in a particular basis , typically LCAO type . In Ref. 194 , to help 

the use of training data computed with plane wave codes that are currently much more widely 

used for solid state calculations and are used to generate major DFT data dabases ,195,196 DFT 

Hamiltonian matrix elements in LCAO type basis were predicted from those in a plane wave 

basis. Page 30 of 54 

Figure 5. Example of a basis function optimized in BigDFT 192 to minimum energy, 

starting from a p-type Si -centered function, for a hydrogen -terminated Si nanoparticle. 

The issue of the wavefunction cusp in the electronic problem that complicates 

integration in the context of variational calculations can be obviated by using collocation. 76,197 

In Ref. 75 , it was shown that ML can be used to optimize collocation point placement. In that 

work, the basis was of spherical harmonic type with the parameters of the radial component 

optimized manually. Their optimization with ML would offer further improvement of basis 

quality. Collocation has not yet been explored for nuclear DFT. One its advantage is the 

possibility of using non -integrable basis functions 198 which could offer additional optimization 

opportunities. 

Basis size is generally less of a limiting factor in nuclear DFT than in electronic DFT, 

especially for near -spherical or moderately deformed stable nuclei, where harmonic -oscillator 

bases are usually compact and efficient. 49 However, the choice and optimization of the basis 

become s important when the basis is poorly adapted to the relevant density distribution. This 

occurs, for example, in weakly bound nuclei close to the drip lines, where the density may have 

an extended asymptotic tail that is inefficiently represented by the Gaus sian falloff of a 

harmonic -oscillator basis, and in large -amplitude collective motion such as fission, where 

strongly elongated, necked, or fragment -like configurations are not naturally described by a 

single -center basis. 199 –201 Triaxial and reflection -asymmetric shapes, superheavy nuclei, 

multidimensional potential -energy -surface calculations, and large -scale mass -table 

calculations can further amplify the cost and truncation errors associated with basis size Page 31 of 54 

because many self -consistent calculations have to be repeated. 51,52,202 –204 Existing non -ML 

developments already demonstrate the practical value of adapting the basis to the nuclear 

problem. Deformed harmonic -oscillator bases are widely used for the calculations of deformed 

nuclei; 202,205,206 transformed harmonic -oscillator bases were introduced to improve the 

description of weakly bound systems and their asymptotic densities; 203,207 Woods -Saxon basis 

and its optimization provide a more realistic representation of surface, asymptotic, and 

continuum effects; 208,209 two -center harmonic -oscillator bases are useful for fission and fusion 

configurations in which a single -center basis is inefficient. 201,210 Recent studies of basis 

truncation and oscillator -frequency optimization in covariant DFT also show that basis 

parameters can have a measurable effect on calculated binding energies and related 

observables. 204,211 These examples suggest that ML -based basis optimization in nuclear DFT 

would be useful not only for building adaptive basis representations, but also for choos ing basis 

parameters and estimat ing basis -truncation effects. To the best of our knowledge, explicitly 

ML -based construction or optimization of bases has so far not been explored in nuclear DFT -

related contexts .

3.2.2 Density representation 

Density featurization is important to featurize ML functionals . One can distinguish features 

that encode the entire density distribution or density topology in the vicinity of a point in space 

when machine learning energy density . When encoding the entire density distribution, a direct 

grid representation is onerous in electronic DFT . While it has been used in less than three 

dimensions i n both electronic 106,169,174,175 and nuclear 139,142 DFT, it is not feasible or desirable 

in 3D in the case of electronic DFT (where one wishes to compute systems with large numbers 

of atoms, and enhancing size capability is a major purpose of ML -enhanced DFT methods ). In 

nuclear DFT, on the contrary, 3D grids are viable for most nuclei. Discrete variable 

representation has also been used in a 1D electronic problem. 78 Ref. 130 used principal 

components of promolecular electron density . In Ref s. 127,178 , coefficients of a harmonic 

oscillator -like basis functions were used to featurize the electron density. In 3D, one often used 

a representation of the density in a basis , and basis coefficients then serve as features. Gaussian 

(with or without spherical harmonic s for angular coordinates) 95,103,147,168,212 –214 and 

Fourier 16,177,215 bases have been used for electron density . In Ref. 123 to machine -learn 

𝜌 ̃𝑝 ([𝜌 (𝒓 )]) in (∇2 − 𝜆 2)𝑉 𝑝 ([𝜌 (𝒓 )]) = −4𝜋 𝜌 ̃𝑝 ([𝜌 (𝒓 )]) , where  𝑉 𝑝 ([𝜌 (𝒓 )]) is Pauli potential ,

features were computed as  𝑑 𝑖 = ∫ 𝜌 (𝒓 )𝑒 −𝑟 𝑎 𝑖 ⁄ 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (𝜋 𝑚 𝑖 𝑟 

> 𝑅 𝑐

) 𝑓 𝑐 (𝒓 )𝑑 𝒓  

> 𝑅 𝑐
> 0

, where  𝑚 𝑖  and  𝑎 𝑖  are Page 32 of 54 

parameters,  𝑅 𝑐  is a cutoff radius, and  𝑓 𝑐 (𝒓 ) is a cutoff function . In Ref. 213 , a combination of 

short -ranged orthogonal Bessel (SR -OB) functions and long -ranged damped -multipole (LR -

DM) functions was used for the radial portion of basis functions (with spherical harmonics for 

the radial part) , when machine learning the mapping between the external potential and electron 

density. with SOAP 161 -based density encoding was used in Refs. 160,162 .

Featurization for ML of energy density often involves power s (and sometimes other 

nonlinear functions 90,124,216 ) of the density and its derivatives at points in space , effectively 

terms of the gradient expansion .105,114 –118,120,122,128,167,184,217 In Refs. 117 –120 , a case was made for 

the utility of the product of the electron density and KS effective potential (which can be related 

to Pauli potential 125 ) as a feature. Convolutional fi lters can be applied to gridded values of the 

density or density -dependent quantities, further increasing the descriptive power. 121,126 

Both grid and basis representations of the density could be ML -optimized for more 

efficient featurization for ML functionals. Optimized representations can also be used for more 

efficient output of the density with methods that predict electron density with ML methods 

from descriptors of chemical composition and structure 218 –226 – such predicted densities are 

important in the context of ML -enhanced DFT in tha t, when an ML -predicted density is 

accurate enough, it can be used as is as input to an ML functional, obviating the need to 

optimize the density and afferent issues with stability with respect to functional derivative. 

Alternatively, such predicted densities can be used to speed up optimization, initializing the 

density closer to the optimum. Similar uses on predicted density could be explored in nuclear 

DFT. There is a relation between the optimality (completeness) of the basis and the necessary 

number of real -space points sampling it: the more complete the basis the fewer sampling points 

are needed. 197,227 There is therefore potential in studies of ML -optimized density “grids” and 

ML -optimized basis sets for representing the density (either electron or nucleon density) that 

has not need explored yet. 

Experimentally, nucle ar charge densities extracted from elastic electron scattering are 

usually represented by parameterized forms, such as modified harmonic -oscillator, Fermi, or 

Gaussian distributions, 228 or by more model -independent expansions such as Fourier -Bessel 

and sum -of -Gaussians representations ,229,230 i.e. types of bas es also often used to represent 

electron density in electronic DFT . The accuracy and robustness of these approaches depend 

on the assumed form, cutoff radius, or fitting procedure. 228 –230 In nuclear DFT calculations, 

however , density representations in a bas is are practically not used, and nuclear densities are 

typically stored on spatial grids or reconstructed from occupied single -particle orbitals in mean -

field or Kohn -Sham calculations. Grid representations are flexible but may be computationally Page 33 of 54 

heavy, whereas orbital summation reintroduces the orbital degrees of freedom that orbital -free 

DFT seeks to avoid. Therefore, compact and systematic density representations are valuable 

for nuclear DFT, especially for orbital -free formulations in which the density is the fundamental 

variable. A recent ML -optimized example of density representation is to use principal 

component analysis to build a compact orthogonal basis for nuclear density representation, 

achieving accurate reconstructions with only a few components, more efficiently than 

traditional methods. 231 Basis representations of nucleon densities, including the use of the bases 

that are already well understood from experimental studies ,228 –230 which could be further 

improved with ML , thus offers a promising avenue for density featurization for ML -enhanced 

nuclear DFT . ML -optimized grids may also be promising. 

3.3 Pseudopotentials , convergence, and other issues 

For electronic KS DFT, there exist sufficiently accura te non -local pseudopotentials of various 

types, 29 –32 and the field of ML PPs is therefore muted. Non -ML optimization of PP parameters 

is typically performed. 232,233 Nevertheless, methods from the ML toolkit have been used. For 

example, genetic algorithms (GA) have been used to optimize PAW PPs : in Refs. 234 to optimize 

the cutoff radius and projector energies for the s and p orbitals , and in Ref. 235 to optimize the 

PAW atomic dataset. Such optimizations are most useful for cases where standard PP libraries 

might not work well, such as the modeling of materials at ultra -high pressure. 235 ML PPs are 

more in demand for empirical pseudopotential (EP ) method 236,237 in which the effective 

potential of a crystal if fitted to experimental data under a frozen core approximation. As the 

potential in the EP method is a local potential experienced by one electron , the developments 

in the ML EP method are relevant for LPP development for OF DFT . The field of ML PPs for 

the EP methos was initiated in Ref. 238 , in which an NN was used to machine -learn a LPP for 

Si and O in Si and SiO 2 solids. The authors used, in particular, SOAP 161 and related features .

ML LPP for OF DFT can be said to be more critically im portant as availability of good 

LPPs is a bottleneck preventing the use of electronic OF DFT in applications. LPP tuning often 

involves fitting parameters of a pre -defined function. 128 ML LPP for electronic OF DFT were 

also reviewed in Ref. 83 . This field still has a relatively limited body of work but has significant 

potential. GA was used in Ref. 239 to fit the parameters of analytic expressions of LPPs of Li, 

Na, and Mg to experimental and KS DFT values of geometries and energies of different phases 

and mechanical properties. Th at work also showed that pseudopotential can also be use to 

effectively palliate KEF deficiencies, in that case to reproduce the cohesive energy whose 

calculation involves energies of both bulk and atoms, which are not simultaneously accurate Page 34 of 54 

with existing functionals (WT 170 and WGC 240 ). Beyond finding parameters of an analytic 

function, proper ML -based representations of LPP have also been considered: a GPR -based 

representation for Sn pseudopotential was developed in Ref. 241 to reproduce the experimental 

lattice constants and energy differences between α- and β-Sn phases as well as KS DFT electron 

density distributions. Rather than using an ML representation of LPP functional form, Ref. 242 

used NN to represent norm -conserving pseudo -wavefunctions  𝜓 𝑙 (𝑟 ) = 𝑁 𝑛𝑐 𝑟 𝑙 +1𝑒 𝑁 𝑁 𝑙 (𝑟 )

(corresponding to energies  𝜖 𝑙 ) and the LPP was computed from  𝜓 𝑙 (𝑟 ) and  𝜖 𝑙 . This approach 

resulted in energies, structures, energy -volume curves, and band structures of multiple 

compounds made of s- and p-block elements of the second to the fourth periods approaching 

those computed with non -local pseudopotentials. 

Softening of interaction is also helpful for the convergence of self -consistency cycles. The 

convergence of self -consistency cycles can also be accelerated with ML. Ref. 214 used an 

equivariant graph transformer NN to emulate SCF cycles, predicting SCF electron density from 

an input density and descriptors of composition and structure. “Traditional” DFT -like accuracy 

was achievable on QM9 243 and QMugs 244 molecular datasets. 

In nuclear DFT, there is no direct analogue of the core -valence pseudopotential issue 

encountered in electronic DFT, and correspondingly no existing ML studies devoted to similar 

topics. However, strateg ies there for electronic DFT to accelerate convergence of self -

consistency cycles could also be useful in nuclear DFT, where a large fraction of the 

computational cost of large -scale EDF applications comes from repeatedly solving self -

consistent mean -field or HFB equations. ML models could be used to predict good initial 

densities, or to emulate part of the SCF update and mixing procedure. Used in this way, ML 

would not replace the final variational EDF calculation, but could reduce the number of 

iterations and lower the cost of large -scale nuclear EDF calculations .

# 4 Conclusions and perspectives : different promising methodological and 

# algorithmic choices for different flavors of DFT 

In this perspective, we summarized how ML is used to improve DFT . We focused on four 

flavors of DFT: electronic and nuclear, Kohn -Sham and orbital -free , tried to make transpire 

both similarities and differences in how ML/AI methods are or can be used in them , and 

provided our perspective on promising directions . There are significant opportunities for cross -

field fertilization between the fields of electronic and nuclear ML -enhanced DFT. As the field 

progresses towards more powerful and applications -ready ML -enhanced DFT and from the use Page 35 of 54 

of common ML methods towards methods that can be called AI such as formula discovery, we 

believe such cross -fertilization will be all the more important. 

The key ingredient of DFT that is specific to it s core is the energy density functional. 

In electr onic DFT, fields of ML XC functionals and KEF are already thriving. Similar ML 

methods tend to be used for both, and NNs remain the most actively pursued type of method. 

However, the accuracy and CPU cost requirements are not the same . ML XC functionals are 

most often developed for KS DFT; their role is to reproduce only the exchange -correlation 

portion of the total energy – an important yet relatively small part of total energy, on the order 

of 5 -10% . The critical correlation component ( as exact exchange can be used to help reproduce 

exchange energy ) is typically as small as 1% . In contrast, the kinetic energy that needs to be 

reproduced by an ML KEF is as high as 60 -70% of total energy . The accuracy requirements are 

much more stringent then . At the same time, in the KS paradigm, cal ls to the XC functional are 

typically not the computational bottleneck, solving a large eigenvalue problem is what is 

responsible for the near -cubic scaling. This in principle permits using relatively costly ML 

solutions such as large NNs without introducing large overhead. In OF DFT, on the other hand, 

the CPU cost of calls to the EDF is a major component of the CPU cost of the calculation , and 

the use of large NNs could end up partially defeating the purpose. We therefore view lighter 

approaches including smaller NNs (that, as was indicated above, can have performance on par 

with move involved algorithms such as GNN ), kernel regressions or even low -order 

polynomial regression s on appropriately defined features , and especially ML -derived formulas 

as particularly promising for KEFs. ML XC functionals can also be used in OF DFT, where the 

cost concerns of more involved ML architectures also acquire importance , in which case lighter 

ML solutions would be desirable . This issue interplays with accuracy: a lighter ML solution 

can be facilitated by using physically -motivated features or restrictions , in which case the 

model is expected to embed more error cancellation (important for the calculation of interaction 

energies) than a large NN. 

In nuclear DFT, there is emerging field of ML KEFs that deals with many of the same 

issues and the field of ML KEFs for electronic DFT . However, the relevant accuracy 

requirements and practical targets in the description of nuclear ground states differ from those 

in electronic DFT; moreover, sub -dimensional, e.g., symmetry -constrained calculations, are 

relevant for applied calculations on real nuclei, while in electronic DFT, sub -dimensional 

models are mainly useful to test ideas and often use solutions, such as certain grid -based 

representations, that are not practical in 3D calculations on real materials. This creates a 

potential for ML -enhanced OF DFT to fast -track in nuclear applications, while electronic ML Page 36 of 54 

OF DFT still faces severe challenges in consistently achieving chemical accuracy beyond 

simple metals , not only due to the lack of accurate KEFs but also due to the lack of accurate 

LPPs. Nuclear ML -enhanced OF DFT can and has been benefiting from the experience s gained 

in electronic DFT . Certain promising approaches worked out in the field of ML KEFs for 

electronic DFT can benefit nuclear OF DFT in the future, such as the use of the terms of the 

gradient expansion as input features. There is no direct equivalent to ML XC in nuclear DFT 

because the underlying nuclear interactions are largely unknown and should be constructed 

phenomenologically to begin with, as opposed to the known Coulombic interactions in 

electronic DFT. Nevertheless , the advent of AI methods creates the possibility of discovering 

key terms in nuclear EDFs in the future .

ML -optimized basis representations of KS states and of the density , for the purpose of 

achieving compact bases , could be beneficial for both electronic and nuclear DFT. There is a

limited number of works to date but good potential for future research . Here also, lighter ML 

solutions (than complex NN) are desired . While more optimal bases are clearly desired even 

for medium -scale electronic DFT calculations and are critically important to enable large -scale 

electronic structure calculations , basis size is often not considered as a critical limiting issue in 

most nuclear DFT calculations . Nevertheless, ML -optimized bases could be beneficial for 

highly -accurate nuclear DFT calculations or large -scale calculations over the nuclear chart or 

for faster sampling of nucleus PESs . As similar types of basis functions found use in electronic 

and nuclear DFT , cross -fertilization can be fruitful. 

Symbolic regression or automatic formular construction has so far been used in a limited 

way but appears to be promising for electronic and nuclear, KS and OF DFT, and for functionals, 

basis functions, and pseudopotentials. It marries the expressive power of ML methods with the 

speed of calculations and portability provided by simple formulas. Importantly, it offers 

interpretability that can help guide theory development. Whi le symbolic regression is 

promising for all aspects of ML -enhanced DFT, it is particularly promising in areas where the 

high CPU cost of ML models can form bottlenecks. This includes KEFs for OF DFT as most 

of the CPU cost of an OF DFT calculation is due t o functional calls. It also includes ML -

optimized basis functions, where calling a large ML model for each basis function would be 

prone to defeat the purpose despite a smaller size of the resulting basis set. For the same reason ,

direct use of complex ML models for representing KS states 17 does not appear to us particularly 

promising, as a large number of such states need to be computed. 

The compute -heavy nature of complex NN architectures such as convolutional and graph 

NN that made their way into ML -enhanced DFT can be palliated with GPU - and TPU -Page 37 of 54 

amenable algorithms and the use of corresponding hardware . This address es the underlying 

issue only partially as GPU and TPU come with their own cost, energy consumption, and 

availability concerns. NPU (neural processing units) 245 specifically dedicated to accelerating 

digital neurocomputing could be promising . A quantum leap is promised by neuromorphic 

computing 246 whereby an NN implementing, for example, a functional and that may be trained 

on a digital computer is printed on an analog circuit , and ultimately optical computing. 247 

However, these technologies are not mature. It also remains open if they are suited for highly 

accurate ML that is necessary for ML -enhanced DFT , see Refs . 248,249 for the effect of 

limitations specific to neuromorphic circuits, in particular, in high -accuracy regimes such as 

ML KEF .250 The use of simpler and faster, “lighter” ML methods than large NNs still therefore 

appears to be desired for ML -enhanced DFT and in particular OF -DFT .

The issues of computational cost as well as stability can also be simultaneously palliated 

by evaluating the EDF on precomputed densities without further optimization. Such densities 

can be predicted from compositional and structural descriptors via machin e learning and other 

related approaches, as discussed in Refs ,. 218 –225 . Research targeting electron density prediction 

is advancing at a fast pace. It is reasonable to expect that sufficiently precise electron densities 

can be readily obtained for non -self -consistent EDF calculations, at least for a range of material 

systems . These strategies are also promising for nuclear DFT applications. 

# 5 Author contributions 

Xin -Hui Wu: Conceptualization , Methodology , Project administration , Writing – original draft ,

Writing – review & editing. 

Sergei Manzhos : Conceptualization , Methodology , Project administration , Writing – original 

draft , Writing – review & editing. 

# 6 Conflicts of interest 

There are no conflicts to declare .Page 38 of 54 

# 7 Data availability 

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this 

review .

# 8 Acknowledgements 

XHW was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 

No. 12405134. 

We thank Tengxiang Li for providing the image for  Figure 5.

# 9 References 

(1) Cohen, A. J.; Mori -Sánchez, P.; Yang, W. Challenges for Density Functional Theory. 

Chem. Rev. 2012 , 112 (1), 289 –320. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr200107z. 

(2) Jones, R. O. Density Functional Theory: Its Origins, Rise to Prominence, and Future. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 2015 , 87 (3), 897 –923. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.897. 

(3) Mi, W.; Luo, K.; Trickey, S. B.; Pavanello, M. Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory: 

An Attractive Electronic Structure Method for Large -Scale First -Principles Simulations. 

Chem. Rev. 2023 , 123 (21), 12039 –12104. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00758. 

(4) Centelles, M.; Schuck, P.; Viñas, X. Thomas –Fermi Theory for Atomic Nuclei Revisited. 

Annals of Physics 2007 , 322 (2), 363 –396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2006.07.009. 

(5) Brack, M.; Guet, C.; Håkansson, H. -B. Selfconsistent Semiclassical Description of 

Average Nuclear Properties —a Link between Microscopic and Macroscopic Models. 

Physics Reports 1985 , 123 (5), 275 –364. https://doi.org/10.1016/0370 -1573(86)90078 -

5. 

(6) Bender, M.; Heenen, P. -H.; Reinhard, P. -G. Self -Consistent Mean -Field Models for 

Nuclear Structure. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2003 , 75 (1), 121 –180. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.75.121. 

(7) Colò, G. Nuclear Density Functional Theory. Advances in Physics: X 2020 , 5 (1), 

1740061. https://doi.org/10.1080/23746149.2020.1740061. 

(8) Meng, J. Relativistic Density Functional for Nuclear Structure ; International Review of 

Nuclear Physics; WORLD SCIENTIFIC: Singapore, 2016; Vol. 10. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1142/9872. 

(9) Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning ; Information Science and 

Statistics; Springer: Singapore, 2006. 

(10) Montavon, G.; Orr, G. B.; Mueller, K. -R. Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade , 2nd ed.; 

Springer: Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. 

(11) Rasmussen, C. E.; Williams, C. K. I. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning ; MIT 

Press: Cambridge MA, USA, 2006. 

(12) Thant, Y. M.; Wakamiya, T.; Nukunudompanich, M.; Kameda, K.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, 

S. Kernel Regression Methods for Prediction of Materials Properties: Recent 

Developments. Chem. Phys. Rev. 2025 , 6 (1), 011306. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0242118. 

(13) Makke, N.; Chawla, S. Interpretable Scientific Discovery with Symbolic Regression: A 

Review. Artif Intell Rev 2024 , 57 (1), 2. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462 -023 -10622 -0. 

(14) Dong, J.; Zhong, J. Recent Advances in Symbolic Regression. ACM Comput. Surv. 2025 ,

57 (11), 290:1 -290:37. https://doi.org/10.1145/3735634. Page 39 of 54 

(15) del Rio, B. G.; Phan, B.; Ramprasad, R. A Deep Learning Framework to Emulate Density 

Functional Theory. npj Comput Mater 2023 , 9 (1), 158. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -

023 -01115 -3. 

(16) Brockherde, F.; Vogt, L.; Li, L.; Tuckerman, M. E.; Burke, K.; Müller, K. -R. Bypassing 

the Kohn -Sham Equations with Machine Learning. Nat. Commun. 2017 , 8 (1), 872. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -00839 -3. 

(17) Hou, B.; Wu, J.; Qiu, D. Y. Unsupervised Representation Learning of Kohn –Sham States 

and Consequences for Downstream Predictions of Many -Body Effects. Nat. Commun. 

2024 , 15 (1), 9481. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -024 -53748 -7. 

(18) Bogojeski, M.; Vogt -Maranto, L.; Tuckerman, M. E.; Müller, K. -R.; Burke, K. Quantum 

Chemical Accuracy from Density Functional Approximations via Machine Learning. 

Nat Commun 2020 , 11 (1), 5223. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -19093 -1. 

(19) Hohenberg, P.; Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. Phys. Rev. 1964 , 136 (3B), 

B864 –B871. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864. 

(20) Levy, M. Universal Variational Functionals of Electron Densities, First -Order Density 

Matrices, and Natural Spin -Orbitals and Solution of the v -Representability Problem. 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1979 , 76 (12), 6062 –6065. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.76.12.6062. 

(21) Kohn, W.; Sham, L. J. Self -Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation 

Effects. Phys. Rev. 1965 , 140 (4A), A1133 –A1138. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.140.A1133. 

(22) Soler, J. M.; Artacho, E.; Gale, J. D.; García, A.; Junquera, J.; Ordejón, P.; Sánchez -

Portal, D. The SIESTA Method for Ab Initio Order -N Materials Simulation. J. Phys.: 

Condens. Matter 2002 , 14 (11), 2745 –2779. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953 -

8984/14/11/302. 

(23) Mohr, S.; Ratcliff, L. E.; Genovese, L.; Caliste, D.; Boulanger, P.; Goedecker, S.; 

Deutsch, T. Accurate and Efficient Linear Scaling DFT Calculations with Universal 

Applicability. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015 , 17 (47), 31360 –31370. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CP00437C. 

(24) Nakata, A.; Baker, J. S.; Mujahed, S. Y.; Poulton, J. T. L.; Arapan, S.; Lin, J.; Raza, Z.; 

Yadav, S.; Truflandier, L.; Miyazaki, T.; Bowler, D. R. Large Scale and Linear Scaling 

DFT with the CONQUEST Code. J. Chem. Phys. 2020 , 152 (16), 164112. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0005074. 

(25) Bowler, D. R.; Miyazaki, T. Calculations for Millions of Atoms with Density Functional 

Theory: Linear Scaling Shows Its Potential. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2010 , 22 (7), 

074207. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953 -8984/22/7/074207. 

(26) Prentice, J. C. A.; Aarons, J.; Womack, J. C.; Allen, A. E. A.; Andrinopoulos, L.; Anton, 

L.; Bell, R. A.; Bhandari, A.; Bramley, G. A.; Charlton, R. J.; Clements, R. J.; Cole, D. 

J.; Constantinescu, G.; Corsetti, F.; Dubois, S. M. -M.; Duff, K. K. B.; Esca rtín, J. M.; 

Greco, A.; Hill, Q.; Lee, L. P.; Linscott, E.; O’Regan, D. D.; Phipps, M. J. S.; Ratcliff, 

L. E.; Serrano, Á. R.; Tait, E. W.; Teobaldi, G.; Vitale, V.; Yeung, N.; Zuehlsdorff, T. J.; 

Dziedzic, J.; Haynes, P. D.; Hine, N. D. M.; Mostofi, A. A. ; Payne, M. C.; Skylaris, C. -

K. The ONETEP Linear -Scaling Density Functional Theory Program. J. Chem. Phys. 

2020 , 152 (17), 174111. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0004445. 

(27) Mortensen, J. J.; Larsen, A. H.; Kuisma, M.; Ivanov, A. V.; Taghizadeh, A.; Peterson, A.; 

Haldar, A.; Dohn, A. O.; Schäfer, C.; Jónsson, E. Ö.; Hermes, E. D.; Nilsson, F. A.; 

Kastlunger, G.; Levi, G.; Jónsson, H.; Häkkinen, H.; Fojt, J.; Kangsabanik, J.; S ødequist, 

J.; Lehtomäki, J.; Heske, J.; Enkovaara, J.; Winther, K. T.; Dulak, M.; Melander, M. M.; 

Ovesen, M.; Louhivuori, M.; Walter, M.; Gjerding, M.; Lopez -Acevedo, O.; Erhart, P.; 

Warmbier, R.; Würdemann, R.; Kaappa, S.; Latini, S.; Boland, T. M.; Blig aard, T.; Page 40 of 54 

Skovhus, T.; Susi, T.; Maxson, T.; Rossi, T.; Chen, X.; Schmerwitz, Y. L. A.; Schiøtz, J.; 

Olsen, T.; Jacobsen, K. W.; Thygesen, K. S. GPAW: An Open Python Package for 

Electronic Structure Calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 2024 , 160 (9), 092503. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0182685. 

(28) Genovese, L.; Neelov, A.; Goedecker, S.; Deutsch, T.; Ghasemi, S. A.; Willand, A.; 

Caliste, D.; Zilberberg, O.; Rayson, M.; Bergman, A.; Schneider, R. Daubechies 

Wavelets as a Basis Set for Density Functional Pseudopotential Calculations. J. Chem. 

Phys. 2008 , 129 (1). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2949547. 

(29) Troullier, N.; Martins, J. L. Efficient Pseudopotentials for Plane -Wave Calculations. 

Phys. Rev. B 1991 , 43 (3), 1993 –2006. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.43.1993. 

(30) Goedecker, S.; Teter, M.; Hutter, J. Separable Dual -Space Gaussian Pseudopotentials. 

Phys. Rev. B 1996 , 54 (3), 1703 –1710. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.54.1703. 

(31) Vanderbilt, D. Soft Self -Consistent Pseudopotentials in a Generalized Eigenvalue 

Formalism. Phys. Rev. B 1990 , 41 (11), 7892 –7895. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.41.7892. 

(32) Blöchl, P. E. Projector Augmented -Wave Method. Phys. Rev. B 1994 , 50 (24), 17953 –

17979. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953. 

(33) Dolg, M.; Cao, X. Relativistic Pseudopotentials: Their Development and Scope of 

Applications. Chem. Rev. 2012 , 112 (1), 403 –480. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr2001383. 

(34) Rehn, D. A.; Wills, J. M.; Battelle, T. E.; Mattsson, A. E. Dirac’s Equation and Its 

Implications for Density Functional Theory Based Calculations of Materials Containing 

Heavy Elements. Phys. Rev. B 2020 , 101 (8), 085114. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.101.085114. 

(35) Gajdoš, M.; Hummer, K.; Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J.; Bechstedt, F. Linear Optical 

Properties in the Projector -Augmented Wave Methodology. Phys. Rev. B 2006 , 73 (4), 

045112. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.73.045112. 

(36) Casida, M. E. Time -Dependent Density -Functional Theory for Molecules and Molecular 

Solids. J. Mol. Struct. THEOCHEM 2009 , 914 (1), 3–18. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.theochem.2009.08.018. 

(37) Adamo, C.; Jacquemin, D. The Calculations of Excited -State Properties with Time -

Dependent Density Functional Theory. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013 , 42 (3), 845 –856. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C2CS35394F. 

(38) Yabana, K.; Bertsch, G. F. Time -Dependent Local -Density Approximation in Real Time. 

Phys. Rev. B 1996 , 54 (7), 4484 –4487. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.54.4484. 

(39) Shao, X.; Jiang, K.; Mi, W.; Genova, A.; Pavanello, M. DFTpy: An Efficient and Object -

Oriented Platform for Orbital -Free DFT Simulations. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,

11 (1), e1482. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1482. 

(40) Zhang, X.; Huang, C. Time -Dependent Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory: A New 

Development of the Dynamic Kinetic Energy Potential. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025 ,

21 (11), 5559 –5570. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5c00592. 

(41) Jiang, K.; Pavanello, M. Time -Dependent Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory: 

Background and Pauli Kernel Approximations. Phys. Rev. B 2021 , 103 (24), 245102. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.103.245102. 

(42) Engel, J. Intrinsic -Density Functionals. Phys. Rev. C 2007 , 75 (1), 014306. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.75.014306. 

(43) Stone, J. R.; Reinhard, P. -G. The Skyrme Interaction in Finite Nuclei and Nuclear Matter. 

Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 2007 , 58 (2), 587 –657. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2006.07.001. Page 41 of 54 

(44) Dutra, M.; Lourenço, O.; Sá Martins, J. S.; Delfino, A.; Stone, J. R.; Stevenson, P. D. 

Skyrme Interaction and Nuclear Matter Constraints. Phys. Rev. C 2012 , 85 (3), 035201. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.85.035201. 

(45) Goriely, S.; Hilaire, S.; Girod, M.; Péru, S. First Gogny -Hartree -Fock -Bogoliubov 

Nuclear Mass Model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009 , 102 (24), 242501. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.242501. 

(46) Dechargé, J.; Gogny, D. Hartree -Fock -Bogolyubov Calculations with the 

$D1$ Effective Interaction on Spherical Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 1980 , 21 (4), 1568 –1593. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.21.1568. 

(47) Zhao, P. W.; Li, Z. P.; Yao, J. M.; Meng, J. New Parametrization for the Nuclear 

Covariant Energy Density Functional with a Point -Coupling Interaction. Phys. Rev. C 

2010 , 82 (5), 054319. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.82.054319. 

(48) Wu, X.; Colò, G.; Hagino, K.; Zhao, P. Nonlocal Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory 

Incorporating Nuclear Shell Effects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2026 , 136 (9), 092501. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/nlpk -3tt2. 

(49) Vautherin, D.; Brink, D. M. Hartree -Fock Calculations with Skyrme’s Interaction. I. 

Spherical Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 1972 , 5 (3), 626 –647. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.5.626. 

(50) Zhou, S. -G.; Meng, J.; Ring, P. Spherical Relativistic Hartree Theory in a Woods -Saxon 

Basis. Phys. Rev. C 2003 , 68 (3), 034323. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.68.034323. 

(51) Zhang, K.; Cheoun, M. -K.; Choi, Y. -B.; Chong, P. S.; Dong, J.; Dong, Z.; Du, X.; Geng, 

L.; Ha, E.; He, X. -T.; Heo, C.; Ho, M. C.; In, E. J.; Kim, S.; Kim, Y.; Lee, C. -H.; Lee, J.; 

Li, H.; Li, Z.; Luo, T.; Meng, J.; Mun, M. -H.; Niu, Z.; Pan, C.; Papakonstan tinou, P.; 

Shang, X.; Shen, C.; Shen, G.; Sun, W.; Sun, X. -X.; Tam, C. K.; Thaivayongnou; Wang, 

C.; Wang, X.; Wong, S. H.; Wu, J.; Wu, X.; Xia, X.; Yan, Y.; Yeung, R. W. -Y.; Yiu, T. C.; 

Zhang, S.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, Q.; Zhou, S. -G. Nuclear Mass Ta ble in 

Deformed Relativistic Hartree –Bogoliubov Theory in Continuum, I: Even –Even Nuclei. 

Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 2022 , 144 , 101488. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adt.2022.101488. 

(52) Guo, P.; Cao, X.; Chen, K.; Chen, Z.; Cheoun, M. -K.; Choi, Y. -B.; Lam, P. C.; Deng, W.; 

Dong, J.; Du, P.; Du, X.; Duan, K.; Fan, X.; Gao, W.; Geng, L.; Ha, E.; He, X. -T.; Hu, 

J.; Huang, J.; Huang, K.; Huang, Y.; Huang, Z.; Hyung, K. D.; Chan, H. Y.; Jiang, X.; 

Kim, S.; Kim, Y.; Lee, C. -H.; Lee, J.; Li, J.; Li, M.; Li, Z.; Li, Z.; Lian, Z.; Liang, H.; 

Liu, L.; Lu, X.; Liu, Z. -R.; Meng, J.; Meng, Z.; Mun, M. -H.; Niu, Y.; Niu, Z.; Pan, C.; 

Peng, J.; Qu, X.; Papakonstantinou, P.; Shang, T.; Shang, X.; Shen, C.; Shen, G.; Sun, 

T.; Sun, X. -X.; Wang, S.; Wang, T.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wu, J.; Wu, L.; Wu, X.; Xia, 

X.; Xie, H.; Yao, J.; Ip, K. Y.; Yiu, T. C.; Yu, J.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, K.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, S.; 

Zhang, W.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Zhao, Q.; Zhao, Y.; 

Zheng, R.; Zhou, C.; Zhou, S. -G.; Zou, L. Nuclear Mass Table in Deformed Relativistic 

Hartree –Bogoliubov Theory in Continuum, II: Even -Z<math><mi 

Is="true">Z</Mi></Math> Nuclei. Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 2024 , 158 ,

101661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adt.2024.101661. 

(53) Maruhn, J. A.; Reinhard, P. -G.; Stevenson, P. D.; Umar, A. S. The TDHF Code Sky3D. 

Computer Physics Communications 2014 , 185 (7), 2195 –2216. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2014.04.008. 

(54) Ren, Z. X.; Zhang, S. Q.; Meng, J. Solving Dirac Equations on a 3D Lattice with Inverse 

Hamiltonian and Spectral Methods. Phys. Rev. C 2017 , 95 (2), 024313. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.95.024313. 

(55) Negele, J. W. The Mean -Field Theory of Nuclear Structure and Dynamics. Rev. Mod. 

Phys. 1982 , 54 (4), 913 –1015. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.54.913. Page 42 of 54 

(56) Nakatsukasa, T.; Matsuyanagi, K.; Matsuo, M.; Yabana, K. Time -Dependent Density -

Functional Description of Nuclear Dynamics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2016 , 88 (4), 045004. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.88.045004. 

(57) Simenel, C. Nuclear Quantum Many -Body Dynamics (2nd Edition). Eur. Phys. J. A 2025 ,

61 (7), 181. https://doi.org/10.1140/epja/s10050 -025 -01624 -3. 

(58) Simenel, C.; Umar, A. S. Heavy -Ion Collisions and Fission Dynamics with the Time -

Dependent Hartree –Fock Theory and Its Extensions. Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 2018 , 103 ,

19 –66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2018.07.002. 

(59) Droz̊dz̊, S.; Nishizaki, S.; Speth, J.; Wambach, J. The Nuclear Response within Extended 

RPA Theories. Phys. Rep. 1990 , 197 (1), 1–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/0370 -

1573(90)90084 -F. 

(60) Ring, P.; Ma, Z.; Van Giai, N.; Vretenar, D.; Wandelt, A.; Cao, L. The Time -Dependent 

Relativistic Mean -Field Theory and the Random Phase Approximation. Nucl. Phys. A 

2001 , 694 (1), 249 –268. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0375 -9474(01)00986 -1. 

(61) Schmid, K. W. On the Use of General Symmetry -Projected Hartree –Fock –Bogoliubov 

Configurations in Variational Approaches to the Nuclear Many -Body Problem. Progress 

in Particle and Nuclear Physics 2004 , 52 (2), 565 –633. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2004.02.001. 

(62) Ring, P. Relativistic Mean Field Theory in Finite Nuclei. Progress in Particle and 

Nuclear Physics 1996 , 37 , 193 –263. https://doi.org/10.1016/0146 -6410(96)00054 -3. 

(63) Vretenar, D.; Afanasjev, A. V.; Lalazissis, G. A.; Ring, P. Relativistic Hartree –

Bogoliubov Theory: Static and Dynamic Aspects of Exotic Nuclear Structure. Physics 

Reports 2005 , 409 (3), 101 –259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2004.10.001. 

(64) Ring, P. Energy Density Functional Theory in Nuclei: Does It Have to Be Relativistic? 

Phys. Scr. 2012 , T150 , 014035. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031 -8949/2012/T150/014035. 

(65) Ren, Z. X.; Zhao, P. W.; Meng, J. Time -Dependent Covariant Density Functional Theory 

in Three -Dimensional Lattice Space: Benchmark Calculation for the 16O+16O Reaction. 

Phys. Rev. C 2020 , 102 (4), 044603. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.102.044603. 

(66) Ren, Z. X.; Zhao, P. W.; Meng, J. Dynamics of Rotation in Chiral Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 

2022 , 105 (1), L011301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.105.L011301. 

(67) Ren, Z. X.; Vretenar, D.; Nikšić, T.; Zhao, P. W.; Zhao, J.; Meng, J. Dynamical Synthesis 

of 4He in the Scission Phase of Nuclear Fission. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2022 , 128 (17), 172501. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.128.172501. 

(68) Li, B.; Vretenar, D.; Nikšić, T.; Zhao, P. W.; Meng, J. Generalized Time -Dependent 

Generator Coordinate Method for Small - and Large -Amplitude Collective Motion. Phys. 

Rev. C 2023 , 108 (1), 014321. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.108.014321. 

(69) Li, B.; Vretenar, D.; Nikšić, T.; Zhao, P. W.; Meng, J. Microscopic Model for Yields and 

Total Kinetic Energy in Nuclear Fission. Phys. Rev. C 2025 , 111 (5), L051302. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.111.L051302. 

(70) Zhang, D. D.; Vretenar, D.; Nikšić, T.; Zhao, P. W.; Meng, J. Multinucleon Transfer with 

Time -Dependent Covariant Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. C 2024 , 109 (2), 

024614. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.109.024614. 

(71) Wu, X. H.; Ren, Z. X.; Liang, H. Z.; Zhao, P. W. Relativistic Orbital -Free Kinetic Energy 

Density Functional for One -Particle Nuclear Systems. Phys. Rev. C 2025 , 112 (6), 

064319. https://doi.org/10.1103/vysb -vwvq. 

(72) Pi, M.; Barranco, M.; Nemeth, J.; Ngô, C.; Tomasi, E. Time -Dependent Thomas -Fermi 

Approach to Nuclear Monopole Oscillations. Phys. Lett. B 1986 , 166 (1), 1 –4. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0370 -2693(86)91143 -3. Page 43 of 54 

(73) Hodges, C. H. Quantum Corrections to the Thomas –Fermi Approximation —The 

Kirzhnits Method. Can. J. Phys. 1973 , 51 (13), 1428 –1437. https://doi.org/10.1139/p73 -

189. 

(74) Kato, T. On the Eigenfunctions of Many -Particle Systems in Quantum Mechanics. 

Commun. Pure Appl. Math. 1957 , 10 (2), 151 –177. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/cpa.3160100201. 

(75) Ku, J.; Kamath, A.; Carrington, T.; Manzhos, S. Machine Learning Optimization of the 

Collocation Point Set for Solving the Kohn –Sham Equation. J. Phys. Chem. A 2019 , 123 

(49), 10631 –10642. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.9b09732. 

(76) Manzhos, S.; Carrington, T. Using Rectangular Collocation with Finite Difference 

Derivatives to Solve Electronic Schrödinger Equation. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 149 (20), 

204105. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5052196. 

(77) Light, J. C.; Carrington Jr., T. Discrete -Variable Representations and Their Utilization. 

In Advances in Chemical Physics ; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2000; pp 263 –310. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470141731.ch4. 

(78) Snyder, J. C.; Rupp, M.; Hansen, K.; Blooston, L.; Müller, K. -R.; Burke, K. Orbital -Free 

Bond Breaking via Machine Learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2013 , 139 (22), 224104. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4834075. 

(79) Legrain, F.; Manzhos, S. Understanding the Difference in Cohesive Energies between 

Alpha and Beta Tin in DFT Calculations. AIP Adv. 2016 , 6 (4), 045116. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4948434. 

(80) Kylänpää, I.; Balachandran, J.; Ganesh, P.; Heinonen, O.; Kent, P. R. C.; Krogel, J. T. 

Accuracy of Ab Initio Electron Correlation and Electron Densities in Vanadium Dioxide. 

Phys. Rev. Materials 2017 , 1 (6), 065408. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.1.065408. 

(81) Kortelainen, M.; McDonnell, J.; Nazarewicz, W.; Olsen, E.; Reinhard, P. -G.; Sarich, J.; 

Schunck, N.; Wild, S. M.; Davesne, D.; Erler, J.; Pastore, A. Nuclear Energy Density 

Optimization: Shell Structure. Phys. Rev. C 2014 , 89 (5), 054314. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.89.054314. 

(82) Nikšić, T.; Vretenar, D.; Ring, P. Relativistic Nuclear Energy Density Functionals: Mean -

Field and Beyond. Progress in Particle and Nuclear Physics 2011 , 66 (3), 519 –548. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2011.01.055. 

(83) Chen, M.; Pavanello, M.; Mi, W.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, S. Machine Learning -Enhanced 

Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2026 , 22 (7), 3127 –

3143. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5c01995. 

(84) Li, L.; Snyder, J. C.; Pelaschier, I. M.; Huang, J.; Niranjan, U. -N.; Duncan, P.; Rupp, M.; 

Müller, K. -R.; Burke, K. Understanding Machine -Learned Density Functionals. Int. J. 

Quantum Chem. 2016 , 116 (11), 819 –833. https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.25040. 

(85) Akashi, R.; Sogal, M.; Burke, K. Can Machines Learn Density Functionals? Past, 

Present, and Future of ML in DFT. arXiv March 3, 2025. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.01709. 

(86) Hindges, T. S.; He, W.; Li, J. Recent Advances in Electronic Structure Learning. 

Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2026 . https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -651X/ae72ac. 

(87) Manzhos, S. Machine Learning for the Solution of the Schrödinger Equation. Mach. 

Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2020 , 1 (1), 013002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2632 -2153/ab7d30. 

(88) Wu, J.; Pun, S. -M.; Zheng, X.; Chen, G. Construct Exchange -Correlation Functional via 

Machine Learning. J. Chem. Phys. 2023 , 159 (9), 090901. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0150587. 

(89) Nagai, R.; Akashi, R. Development of Exchange -Correlation Functionals Assisted by 

Machine Learning. In Machine Learning in Molecular Sciences ; Qu, C., Liu, H., Eds.; Page 44 of 54 

Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2023; pp 91 –112. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -

3-031 -37196 -7_4. 

(90) Boehnlein, A.; Diefenthaler, M.; Sato, N.; Schram, M.; Ziegler, V.; Fanelli, C.; Hjorth -

Jensen, M.; Horn, T.; Kuchera, M. P.; Lee, D.; Nazarewicz, W.; Ostroumov, P.; Orginos, 

K.; Poon, A.; Wang, X. -N.; Scheinker, A.; Smith, M. S.; Pang, L. -G. Colloquium: 

Machine Learning in Nuclear Physics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2022 , 94 (3), 031003. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.94.031003. 

(91) Medvidović, M.; Umana, J. C.; Ahmadabadi, I.; Di Sante, D.; Flick, J.; Rubio, A. Neural 

Network Distillation of Orbital Dependent Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. Res. 

2025 , 7 (2), 023113. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.7.023113. 

(92) Sokolov, I. O.; Both, G. -J.; Bochevarov, A. D.; Dub, P. A.; Levine, D. S.; Brown, C. T.; 

Acheche, S.; Barkoutsos, P. Kl.; Elfving, V. E. Quantum -Enhanced Neural Exchange -

Correlation Functionals. Phys. Rev. A 2026 , 113 (1), 0124 27. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/m51l -fys2. 

(93) Ma, H.; Narayanaswamy, A.; Riley, P.; Li, L. Evolving Symbolic Density Functionals. 

Sci. Adv. 2022 , 8 (36), eabq0279. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abq0279. 

(94) Kirkpatrick, J.; McMorrow, B.; Turban, D. H. P.; Gaunt, A. L.; Spencer, J. S.; Matthews, 

A. G. D. G.; Obika, A.; Thiry, L.; Fortunato, M.; Pfau, D.; Castellanos, L. R.; Petersen, 

S.; Nelson, A. W. R.; Kohli, P.; Mori -Sánchez, P.; Hassabis, D.; Cohen, A. J. Pushing the 

Frontiers of Density Functionals by Solving the Fractional Electron Problem. Science 

2021 , 374 (6573), 1385 –1389. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abj6511. 

(95) Dick, S.; Fernandez -Serra, M. Machine Learning Accurate Exchange and Correlation 

Functionals of the Electronic Density. Nat. Commun. 2020 , 11 (1), 3509. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -17265 -7. 

(96) Nagai, R.; Akashi, R.; Sugino, O. Machine -Learning -Based Exchange Correlation 

Functional with Physical Asymptotic Constraints. Phys. Rev. Res. 2022 , 4 (1), 013106. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.013106. 

(97) Nagai, R.; Akashi, R.; Sugino, O. Completing Density Functional Theory by Machine 

Learning Hidden Messages from Molecules. npj Comput. Mater. 2020 , 6 (1), 43. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -020 -0310 -0. 

(98) Kanungo, B.; Hatch, J.; Zimmerman, P. M.; Gavini, V. Learning Local and Semi -Local 

Density Functionals from Exact Exchange -Correlation Potentials and Energies. Science 

Advances 2025 , 11 (38), eady8962. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ady8962. 

(99) Zheng, X.; Hu, L.; Wang, X.; Chen, G. A Generalized Exchange -Correlation Functional: 

The Neural -Networks Approach. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004 , 390 (1), 186 –192. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2004.04.020. 

(100) Wang, J.; Zhang, D.; Xu, R. -X.; Yam, C.; Chen, G.; Zheng, X. Improving Density 

Functional Prediction of Molecular Thermochemical Properties with a Machine -

Learning -Corrected Generalized Gradient Approximation. J. Phys. Chem. A 2022 , 126 

(6), 970 –978. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c10491. 

(101) Nudejima, T.; Ikabata, Y.; Seino, J.; Yoshikawa, T.; Nakai, H. Machine -Learned Electron 

Correlation Model Based on Correlation Energy Density at Complete Basis Set Limit. J. 

Chem. Phys. 2019 , 151 (2), 024104. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5100165. 

(102) Lei, X.; Medford, A. J. Design and Analysis of Machine Learning Exchange -Correlation 

Functionals via Rotationally Invariant Convolutional Descriptors. Phys. Rev. Mater. 

2019 , 3 (6), 063801. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.3.063801. 

(103) Gao, N.; Eberhard, E.; Günnemann, S. Learning Equivariant Non -Local Electron 

Density Functionals. arXiv May 16, 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.07972. Page 45 of 54 

(104) Dick, S.; Fernandez -Serra, M. Highly Accurate and Constrained Density Functional 

Obtained with Differentiable Programming. Phys. Rev. B 2021 , 104 (16), L161109. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.104.L161109. 

(105) M. Casares, P. A.; Baker, J. S.; Medvidović, M.; Reis, R. dos; Arrazola, J. M. GradDFT. 

A Software Library for Machine Learning Enhanced Density Functional Theory. J. 

Chem. Phys. 2024 , 160 (6), 062501. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0181037. 

(106) Nagai, R.; Akashi, R.; Sasaki, S.; Tsuneyuki, S. Neural -Network Kohn -Sham Exchange -

Correlation Potential and Its out -of -Training Transferability. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 

(24), 241737. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5029279. 

(107) Yang, J.; Whitfield, J. Machine -Learning Kohn –Sham Potential from Dynamics in Time -

Dependent Kohn –Sham Systems. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2023 , 4 (3), 035022. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/2632 -2153/ace8f0. 

(108) Li, W.; Ou, Q.; Chen, Y.; Cao, Y.; Liu, R.; Zhang, C.; Zheng, D.; Cai, C.; Wu, X.; Wang, 

H.; Chen, M.; Zhang, L. DeePKS + ABACUS as a Bridge between Expensive Quantum 

Mechanical Models and Machine Learning Potentials. J. Phys. Chem. A 2022 , 126 (49), 

9154 –9164. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.2c05000. 

(109) Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; E, W. DeePKS: A Comprehensive Data -Driven Approach 

toward Chemically Accurate Density Functional Theory. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021 ,

17 (1), 170 –181. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00872. 

(110) Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Wang, H.; E, W. DeePKS -Kit: A Package for Developing Machine 

Learning -Based Chemically Accurate Energy and Density Functional Models. Comput. 

Phys. Commun. 2023 , 282 , 108520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2022.108520. 

(111) Zhou, Y.; Wu, J.; Chen, S.; Chen, G. Toward the Exact Exchange –Correlation Potential: 

A Three -Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network Construct. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 

2019 , 10 (22), 7264 –7269. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b02838. 

(112) Tozer, D. J.; Ingamells, V. E.; Handy, N. C. Exchange‐correlation Potentials. J. Chem. 

Phys. 1996 , 105 (20), 9200 –9213. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.472753. 

(113) Sun, L.; Chen, M. Machine Learning Based Nonlocal Kinetic Energy Density Functional 

for Simple Metals and Alloys. Phys. Rev. B 2024 , 109 (11), 115135. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.109.115135. 

(114) Seino, J.; Kageyama, R.; Fujinami, M.; Ikabata, Y.; Nakai, H. Semi -Local Machine -

Learned Kinetic Energy Density Functional Demonstrating Smooth Potential Energy 

Curves. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2019 , 734 , 136732. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2019.136732. 

(115) Fujinami, M.; Kageyama, R.; Seino, J.; Ikabata, Y.; Nakai, H. Orbital -Free Density 

Functional Theory Calculation Applying Semi -Local Machine -Learned Kinetic Energy 

Density Functional and Kinetic Potential. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2020 , 748 , 137358. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2020.137358. 

(116) Golub, P.; Manzhos, S. Kinetic Energy Densities Based on the Fourth Order Gradient 

Expansion: Performance in Different Classes of Materials and Improvement via 

Machine Learning. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2019 , 21 (1), 378 –395. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CP06433D. 

(117) Manzhos, S.; Golub, P. Data -Driven Kinetic Energy Density Fitting for Orbital -Free 

DFT: Linear vs Gaussian Process Regression. J. Chem. Phys. 2020 , 153 (7), 074104. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0015042. 

(118) Manzhos, S.; Lüder, J.; Golub, P.; Ihara, M. Machine Learning -Guided Construction of 

an Analytic Kinetic Energy Functional for Orbital Free Density Functional Theory. Mach. 

Learn.: Sci. Technol. 2025 , 6 (3), 035002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2632 -2153/ade7ca. Page 46 of 54 

(119) Lüder, J.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, S. A Machine -Learned Kinetic Energy Model for Light 

Weight Metals and Compounds of Group III -V Elements. Electron. Struct. 2024 , 6 (4), 

045002. https://doi.org/10.1088/2516 -1075/ad7e8d. 

(120) Manzhos, S.; Lüder, J.; Ihara, M. Machine Learning of Kinetic Energy Densities with 

Target and Feature Smoothing: Better Results with Fewer Training Data. J. Chem. Phys. 

2023 , 159 (23), 234115. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0175689. 

(121) Yao, K.; Parkhill, J. Kinetic Energy of Hydrocarbons as a Function of Electron Density 

and Convolutional Neural Networks. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2016 , 12 (3), 1139 –1147. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.5b01011. 

(122) Seino, J.; Kageyama, R.; Fujinami, M.; Ikabata, Y.; Nakai, H. Semi -Local Machine -

Learned Kinetic Energy Density Functional with Third -Order Gradients of Electron 

Density. J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 (24), 241705. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5007230. 

(123) Ghasemi, S. A.; Kühne, T. D. Artificial Neural Networks for the Kinetic Energy 

Functional of Non -Interacting Fermions. J. Chem. Phys. 2021 , 154 (7), 074107. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0037319. 

(124) Mazo -Sevillano, P. del; Hermann, J. Variational Principle to Regularize Machine -

Learned Density Functionals: The Non -Interacting Kinetic -Energy Functional. J. Chem. 

Phys. 2023 , 159 (19), 194107. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0166432. 

(125) Rincón, L.; Seijas, L. E.; Almeida, R.; Javier Torres, F. Towards the Construction of an 

Accurate Kinetic Energy Density Functional and Its Functional Derivative through 

Physics -Informed Neural Networks. J. Phys. Commun. 2023 , 7 (6), 061001. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/2399 -6528/acd90e. 

(126) Remme, R.; Kaczun, T.; Scheurer, M.; Dreuw, A.; Hamprecht, F. A. KineticNet: Deep 

Learning a Transferable Kinetic Energy Functional for Orbital -Free Density Functional 

Theory. J. Chem. Phys. 2023 , 159 (14), 144113. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0158275. 

(127) Gangwar, A.; Bulusu, S. S.; Banerjee, A. Neural Network Learned Pauli Potential for the 

Advancement of Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory. J. Chem. Phys. 2023 , 159 (12), 

124114. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0165524. 

(128) Imoto, F.; Imada, M.; Oshiyama, A. Order -N Orbital -Free Density -Functional 

Calculations with Machine Learning of Functional Derivatives for Semiconductors and 

Metals. Phys. Rev. Res. 2021 , 3 (3), 033198. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.033198. 

(129) Ryczko, K.; Wetzel, S. J.; Melko, R. G.; Tamblyn, I. Toward Orbital -Free Density 

Functional Theory with Small Data Sets and Deep Learning. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2022 , 18 (2), 1122 –1128. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00812. 

(130) Li, L.; Baker, T. E.; White, S. R.; Burke, K. Pure Density Functional for Strong 

Correlation and the Thermodynamic Limit from Machine Learning. Phys. Rev. B 2016 ,

94 (24), 245129. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.245129. 

(131) Mardirossian, N.; Head -Gordon, M. Thirty Years of Density Functional Theory in 

Computational Chemistry: An Overview and Extensive Assessment of 200 Density 

Functionals. Molecular Physics 2017 , 115 (19), 2315 –2372. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2017.1333644. 

(132) Chen, M.; Jiang, X. -W.; Zhuang, H.; Wang, L. -W.; Carter, E. A. Petascale Orbital -Free 

Density Functional Theory Enabled by Small -Box Algorithms. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2016 , 12 (6), 2950 –2963. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00326. 

(133) González, D. J.; González, L. E. Structure and Motion at the Liquid -Vapor Interface of 

Some Interalkali Binary Alloys: An Orbital -Free Ab Initio Study. J. Chem. Phys. 2009 ,

130 (11), 114703. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3089228. Page 47 of 54 

(134) Carling, K. M.; Carter, E. A. Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory Calculations of the 

Properties of Al, Mg and Al –Mg Crystalline Phases. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 

2003 , 11 (3), 339. https://doi.org/10.1088/0965 -0393/11/3/307. 

(135) Huang, C.; Carter, E. A. Transferable Local Pseudopotentials for Magnesium, Aluminum 

and Silicon. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2008 , 10 (47), 7109 –7120. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/B810407G. 

(136) Liu, Q.; Lu, D.; Chen, M. Structure and Dynamics of Warm Dense Aluminum: A 

Molecular Dynamics Study with Density Functional Theory and Deep Potential. J. 

Phys.: Condens. Matter 2020 , 32 (14), 144002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -

648X/ab5890. 

(137) Zhuang, H.; Chen, M.; Carter, E. A. Elastic and Thermodynamic Properties of Complex 

Mg -Al Intermetallic Compounds via Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. 

Applied 2016 , 5 (6), 064021. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.5.064021. 

(138) Chai, J. -D.; Lignères, V. L.; Ho, G.; Carter, E. A.; Weeks, J. D. Orbital -Free Density 

Functional Theory: Linear Scaling Methods for Kinetic Potentials, and Applications to 

Solid Al and Si. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2009 , 473 (4), 263 –267. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2009.03.064. 

(139) Wu, X. H.; Ren, Z. X.; Zhao, P. W. Nuclear Energy Density Functionals from Machine 

Learning. Phys. Rev. C 2022 , 105 (3), L031303. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.105.L031303. 

(140) Hizawa, N.; Hagino, K.; Yoshida, K. Analysis of a Skyrme Energy Density Functional 

with Deep Learning. Phys. Rev. C 2023 , 108 (3), 034311. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.108.034311. 

(141) Chen, Y. Y.; Wu, X. H. Machine Learning Nuclear Orbital -Free Density Functional 

Based on Thomas –Fermi Approach. Int. J. Mod. Phys. E. 2024 , 33 , 2450012. 

https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218301324500125. 

(142) Wu, X. H.; Ren, Z. X.; Zhao, P. W. Machine Learning Orbital -Free Density Functional 

Theory Resolves Shell Effects in Deformed Nuclei. Commun. Phys. 2025 , 8 (1), 316. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005 -025 -02234 -7. 

(143) Colò, G.; Hagino, K. Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory: Differences and 

Similarities between Electronic and Nuclear Systems. Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2023 ,

2023 (10), 103D01. https://doi.org/10.1093/ptep/ptad118. 

(144) Dutta, A. K.; Arcoragi, J. -P.; Pearson, J. M.; Behrman, R.; Tondeur, F. Thomas -Fermi 

Approach to Nuclear Mass Formula: (I). Spherical Nuclei. Nuclear Physics A 1986 , 458 

(1), 77 –94. https://doi.org/10.1016/0375 -9474(86)90283 -6. 

(145) Aboussir, Y.; Pearson, J. M.; Dutta, A. K.; Tondeur, F. Nuclear Mass Formula via an 

Approximation to the Hartree —Fock Method. Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 

1995 , 61 (1), 127 –176. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092 -640X(95)90014 -4. 

(146) Xia, J.; Huang, C.; Shin, I.; Carter, E. A. Can Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory 

Simulate Molecules? J. Chem. Phys. 2012 , 136 (8), 084102. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3685604. 

(147) Zhang, H.; Liu, S.; You, J.; Liu, C.; Zheng, S.; Lu, Z.; Wang, T.; Zheng, N.; Shao, B. 

Overcoming the Barrier of Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory for Molecular 

Systems Using Deep Learning. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2024 , 4 (3), 210 –223. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588 -024 -00605 -8. 

(148) Lasseri, R. -D.; Regnier, D.; Ebran, J. -P.; Penon, A. Taming Nuclear Complexity with a 

Committee of Multilayer Neural Networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020 , 124 (16), 162502. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.162502. Page 48 of 54 

(149) Symons, B. C. B.; Bane, M. K.; Popelier, P. L. A. DL_FFLUX: A Parallel, Quantum 

Chemical Topology Force Field. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021 , 17 (11), 7043 –7055. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00595. 

(150) Daw, M. S.; Baskes, M. I. Embedded -Atom Method: Derivation and Application to 

Impurities, Surfaces, and Other Defects in Metals. Phys. Rev. B 1984 , 29 (12), 6443 –

6453. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.29.6443. 

(151) Behler, J. Representing Potential Energy Surfaces by High -Dimensional Neural 

Network Potentials. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2014 , 26 (18), 183001. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/0953 -8984/26/18/183001. 

(152) Behler, J. Four Generations of High -Dimensional Neural Network Potentials. Chem. Rev. 

2021 , 121 (16), 10037 –10072. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00868. 

(153) Margossian, C. C. A Review of Automatic Differentiation and Its Efficient 

Implementation. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2019 , 9 (4), e1305. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1305. 

(154) Cuierrier, E.; Roy, P. -O.; Ernzerhof, M. Constructing and Representing Exchange –

Correlation Holes through Artificial Neural Networks. J. Chem. Phys. 2021 , 155 (17), 

174121. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0062940. 

(155) Ikabata, Y.; Fujisawa, R.; Seino, J.; Yoshikawa, T.; Nakai, H. Machine -Learned Electron 

Correlation Model Based on Frozen Core Approximation. J. Chem. Phys. 2020 , 153 (18), 

184108. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0021281. 

(156) Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A.; Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.; Schütt, K. T.; Müller, K. -R. 

Machine Learning of Accurate Energy -Conserving Molecular Force Fields. Science 

Advances 2017 , 3 (5), e1603015. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1603015. 

(157) Dong, L.; Yang, S.; Wei, S. -H.; Lu, Y. Variational Machine Learning Model for 

Electronic Structure Optimization via the Density Matrix. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2025 , 135 (25), 

256403. https://doi.org/10.1103/wl9w -8g8r. 

(158) Li, Y.; Tang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Sun, M.; Zhao, B.; Li, H.; Tao, H.; Yuan, Z.; Duan, W.; Xu, Y. 

Neural -Network Density Functional Theory Based on Variational Energy Minimization. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2024 , 133 (7), 076401. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.133.076401. 

(159) Abbas, A.; Sutter, D.; Zoufal, C.; Lucchi, A.; Figalli, A.; Woerner, S. The Power of 

Quantum Neural Networks. Nat. Comput. Sci. 2021 , 1 (6), 403 –409. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588 -021 -00084 -1. 

(160) Margraf, J. T.; Reuter, K. Pure Non -Local Machine -Learned Density Functional Theory 

for Electron Correlation. Nat. Commun. 2021 , 12 (1), 344. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -20471 -y. 

(161) Bartók, A. P.; Kondor, R.; Csányi, G. On Representing Chemical Environments. Phys. 

Rev. B 2013 , 87 (18), 184115. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.87.184115. 

(162) Margraf, J. T.; Reuter, K. Making the Coupled Cluster Correlation Energy Machine -

Learnable. J. Phys. Chem. A 2018 , 122 (30), 6343 –6348. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b04455. 

(163) Friedman, J. H. Greedy Function Approximation: A Gradient Boosting Machine. Ann. 

Stat. 2001 , 29 (5), 1189 –1232. https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451. 

(164) XGBoost | Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining . ACM Conferences. 

https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2939672.2939785 (accessed 2026 -06 -21). 

(165) Zhao, H.; Gould, T.; Vuckovic, S. Deep Mind 21 Functional Does Not Extrapolate to 

Transition Metal Chemistry. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2024 , 26 (16), 12289 –12298. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/D4CP00878B. 

(166) Jouppi, N. P.; Young, C.; Patil, N.; Patterson, D.; Agrawal, G.; Bajwa, R.; Bates, S.; 

Bhatia, S.; Boden, N.; Borchers, A.; Boyle, R.; Cantin, P.; Chao, C.; Clark, C.; Coriell, Page 49 of 54 

J.; Daley, M.; Dau, M.; Dean, J.; Gelb, B.; Ghaemmaghami, T. V.; Gottipati, R.; Gulland, 

W.; Hagmann, R.; Ho, C. R.; Hogberg, D.; Hu, J.; Hundt, R.; Hurt, D.; Ibarz, J.; Jaffey, 

A.; Jaworski, A.; Kaplan, A.; Khaitan, H.; Koch, A.; Kumar, N.; Lacy, S.; Laud on, J.; 

Law, J.; Le, D.; Leary, C.; Liu, Z.; Lucke, K.; Lundin, A.; MacKean, G.; Maggiore, A.; 

Mahony, M.; Miller, K.; Nagarajan, R.; Narayanaswami, R.; Ni, R.; Nix, K.; Norrie, T.; 

Omernick, M.; Penukonda, N.; Phelps, A.; Ross, J.; Ross, M.; Salek, A.; Sa madiani, E.; 

Severn, C.; Sizikov, G.; Snelham, M.; Souter, J.; Steinberg, D.; Swing, A.; Tan, M.; 

Thorson, G.; Tian, B.; Toma, H.; Tuttle, E.; Vasudevan, V.; Walter, R.; Wang, W.; Wilcox, 

E.; Yoon, D. H. In -Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Proce ssing Unit. arXiv 

April 16, 2017. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1704.04760. 

(167) AdvanceSoft OF -DFT module introduction seminar . AdvanceSoft Corporation. 

https://www.advancesoft.jp/download/90simlib_seminar_20250625 -2_all/ (accessed 

2025 -10 -24). 

(168) Remme, R.; Kaczun, T.; Ebert, T.; Gehrig, C. A.; Geng, D.; Gerhartz, G.; Ickler, M. K.; 

Klockow, M. V.; Lippmann, P.; Schmidt, J. S.; Wagner, S.; Dreuw, A.; Hamprecht, F. A. 

Stable and Accurate Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory Powered by Machine 

Lea rning. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025 , 147 (32), 28851 –28859. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5c06219. 

(169) Meyer, R.; Weichselbaum, M.; Hauser, A. W. Machine Learning Approaches toward 

Orbital -Free Density Functional Theory: Simultaneous Training on the Kinetic Energy 

Density Functional and Its Functional Derivative. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020 , 16 

(9), 5685 –5694. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.0c00580. 

(170) Wang, L. -W.; Teter, M. P. Kinetic -Energy Functional of the Electron Density. Phys. Rev. 

B 1992 , 45 (23), 13196 –13220. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.45.13196. 

(171) Yang, W. Direct Calculation of Electron Density in Density -Functional Theory. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 1991 , 66 (11), 1438 –1441. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.66.1438. 

(172) Parr, R. G.; Yang, W. Density -Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules ; International 

Series of Monographs on Chemistry; Oxford University Press: Oxford, New York, 1995. 

(173) Kohn, W. Density Functional and Density Matrix Method Scaling Linearly with the 

Number of Atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996 , 76 (17), 3168 –3171. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.76.3168. 

(174) Snyder, J. C.; Rupp, M.; Hansen, K.; Müller, K. -R.; Burke, K. Finding Density 

Functionals with Machine Learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 , 108 (25), 253002. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.253002. 

(175) Hollingsworth, J.; Li, L. ( 李力 ); Baker, T. E.; Burke, K. Can Exact Conditions Improve 

Machine -Learned Density Functionals? J. Chem. Phys. 2018 , 148 (24), 241743. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5025668. 

(176) Mitchell, M. A. J.; Ferrandis, T. D. A.; Sanvito, S. 1D Kinetic Energy Density 

Functionals Learned with Symbolic Regression. arXiv December 11, 2024. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.08143. 

(177) Ren, H. -B.; Wang, L.; Dai, X. Machine Learning Kinetic Energy Functional for a One -

Dimensional Periodic System. Chin. Phys. Lett. 2021 , 38 (5), 050701. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/0256 -307X/38/5/050701. 

(178) Gangwar, A.; Bulusu, S. S.; Banerjee, A. Feed -Forward Neural Networks for Fitting of 

Kinetic Energy and Its Functional Derivative. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2022 , 801 , 139718. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2022.139718. 

(179) Schmidt, J.; Benavides -Riveros, C. L.; Marques, M. A. L. Machine Learning the 

Physical Nonlocal Exchange –Correlation Functional of Density -Functional Theory. J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019 , 10 (20), 6425 –6431. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b02422. Page 50 of 54 

(180) Peng, Q.; Zhang, X.; Hung, L.; Carter, E. A.; Lu, G. Quantum Simulation of Materials 

at Micron Scales and Beyond. Phys. Rev. B 2008 , 78 (5), 054118. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.78.054118. 

(181) Peng, Q.; Lu, G. A Comparative Study of Fracture in Al: Quantum Mechanical vs. 

Empirical Atomistic Description. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 2011 , 59 (4), 775 –786. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2011.01.008. 

(182) Sun, Y.; Peng, Q.; Lu, G. Quantum Mechanical Modeling of Hydrogen Assisted 

Cracking in Aluminum. Phys. Rev. B 2013 , 88 (10), 104109. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.88.104109. 

(183) Gastegger, M.; González, L.; Marquetand, P. Exploring Density Functional Subspaces 

with Genetic Algorithms. Monatsh Chem 2019 , 150 (2), 173 –182. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00706 -018 -2335 -3. 

(184) Rodríguez, J. I.; Vergara -Beltrán, U. A. Physics -Inspired Evolutionary Machine 

Learning Method: From the Schrödinger Equation to an Orbital -Free -DFT Kinetic 

Energy Functional. J. Phys. Chem. A 2024 , 128 (40), 8787 –8794. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.4c04155. 

(185) Manzhos, S.; Ihara, M. Neural Network with Optimal Neuron Activation Functions 

Based on Additive Gaussian Process Regression. J. Phys. Chem. A 2023 , 127 (37), 7823 –

7835. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.3c02949. 

(186) Kameda, K.; Ariga, T.; Ito, K.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, S. Machine Learning the Screening 

Factor in the Soft Bond Valence Approach for Rapid Crystal Structure Estimation. 

Digital Discovery 2024 , 3 (10), 1967 –1979. https://doi.org/10.1039/D4DD00152D. 

(187) Tang, Y.; Xiao, B.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, S.; Liu, Y. Effects of Nonlinearity and Inter -

Feature Coupling in Machine Learning Studies of Nb Alloys with Center -Environment 

Features. J. Mater. Inform. 2025 , 5 (3), N/A -N/A. https://doi.org/10.20517/jmi.2025.05. 

(188) Schütt, O.; VandeVondele, J. Machine Learning Adaptive Basis Sets for Efficient Large 

Scale Density Functional Theory Simulation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018 , 14 (8), 

4168 –4175. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00378. 

(189) Prasad, V. K.; Otero -de -la -Roza, A.; DiLabio, G. A. Small -Basis Set Density -Functional 

Theory Methods Corrected with Atom -Centered Potentials. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 

2022 , 18 (5), 2913 –2930. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.2c00036. 

(190) Li, Z.; Wang, L. Machine Learning -Assisted Optimization of MTO Basis Sets. Chinese 

Phys. B 2025 , 35 (1), 016301. https://doi.org/10.1088/1674 -1056/ae0a39. 

(191) Andersen, O. K.; Woolley, R. G. Muffin -Tin Orbitals and Molecular Calculations: 

General Formalism. Mol. Phys. 1973 , 26 (4), 905 –927. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/00268977300102171. 

(192) Ratcliff, L. E.; Dawson, W.; Fisicaro, G.; Caliste, D.; Mohr, S.; Degomme, A.; Videau, 

B.; Cristiglio, V.; Stella, M.; D’Alessandro, M.; Goedecker, S.; Nakajima, T.; Deutsch, 

T.; Genovese, L. Flexibilities of Wavelets as a Computational Basis Set for Large -Scale 

Electronic Structure Calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 2020 , 152 (19), 194110. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0004792. 

(193) Hegde, G.; Bowen, R. C. Machine -Learned Approximations to Density Functional 

Theory Hamiltonians. Sci Rep 2017 , 7 (1), 42669. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep42669. 

(194) Gong, X.; Louie, S. G.; Duan, W.; Xu, Y. Generalizing Deep Learning Electronic 

Structure Calculation to the Plane -Wave Basis. Nat Comput Sci 2024 , 4 (10), 752 –760. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588 -024 -00701 -9. 

(195) Jain, A.; Ong, S. P.; Hautier, G.; Chen, W.; Richards, W. D.; Dacek, S.; Cholia, S.; Gunter, 

D.; Skinner, D.; Ceder, G.; Persson, K. A. Commentary: The Materials Project: A 

Materials Genome Approach to Accelerating Materials Innovation. APL Mater. 2013 , 1

(1), 011002. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4812323. Page 51 of 54 

(196) Kirklin, S.; Saal, J. E.; Meredig, B.; Thompson, A.; Doak, J. W.; Aykol, M.; Rühl, S.; 

Wolverton, C. The Open Quantum Materials Database (OQMD): Assessing the 

Accuracy of DFT Formation Energies. npj Comput Mater 2015 , 1 (1), 1–15. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/npjcompumats.2015.10. 

(197) Manzhos, S.; Ihara, M.; Carrington, T. Using Collocation to Solve the Schrödinger 

Equation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2023 , 19 (6), 1641 –1656. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.2c01232. 

(198) Kamath, A.; Manzhos, S. Inverse Multiquadratic Functions as the Basis for the 

Rectangular Collocation Method to Solve the Vibrational Schrödinger Equation. 

Mathematics 2018 , 6 (11), 253. https://doi.org/10.3390/math6110253. 

(199) Stoitsov, M. V.; Dobaczewski, J.; Nazarewicz, W.; Pittel, S.; Dean, D. J. Systematic 

Study of Deformed Nuclei at the Drip Lines and Beyond. Phys. Rev. C 2003 , 68 (5), 

054312. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.68.054312. 

(200) Stoitsov, M.; Michel, N.; Matsuyanagi, K. New Efficient Method for Performing 

Hartree -Fock -Bogoliubov Calculations for Weakly Bound Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 2008 , 77 

(5), 054301. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.77.054301. 

(201) Li, Z.; Chen, S.; Zhou, M.; Chen, Y.; Li, Z. Covariant Density Functional Theory for 

Nuclear Fission Based on a Two -Center Harmonic Oscillator Basis. Phys. Rev. C 2024 ,

109 (6), 064310. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.109.064310. 

(202) Dobaczewski, J.; Bączyk, P.; Becker, P.; Bender, M.; Bennaceur, K.; Bonnard, J.; Gao, 

Y.; Idini, A.; Konieczka, M.; Kortelainen, M.; Próchniak, L.; Romero, A. M.; Satuła, W.; 

Shi, Y.; Werner, T. R.; Yu, L. F. Solution of Universal Nonrelativistic Nuclear DFT 

Equations in the Cartesian Deformed Harmonic -Oscillator Basis. (IX) HFODD 

(v3.06h): A New Version of the Program. J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. 2021 , 48 (10), 

102001. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361 -6471/ac0a82. 

(203) Perez, R. N.; Schunck, N.; Lasseri, R. -D.; Zhang, C.; Sarich, J. Axially Deformed 

Solution of the Skyrme –Hartree –Fock –Bogolyubov Equations Using the Transformed 

Harmonic Oscillator Basis (III) Hfbtho (v3.00): A New Version of the Program. 

Computer Physics Communications 2017 , 220 , 363 –375. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2017.06.022. 

(204) Taninah, A.; Osei, B.; Afanasjev, A. V.; Perera, U. C.; Teeti, S. Toward Accurate Nuclear 

Mass Tables in Covariant Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. C 2024 , 109 (2), 024321. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.109.024321. 

(205) Vautherin, D. Hartree -Fock Calculations with Skyrme’s Interaction. II. Axially 

Deformed Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 1973 , 7 (1), 296 –316. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.7.296. 

(206) Dobaczewski, J.; Dudek, J. Solution of the Skyrme -Hartree -Fock Equations in the 

Cartesian Deformed Harmonic Oscillator Basis I. The Method. Comput. Phys. Commun. 

1997 , 102 (1), 166 –182. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010 -4655(97)00004 -0. 

(207) Stoitsov, M.; Ring, P.; Vretenar, D.; Lalazissis, G. A. Solution of Relativistic Hartree -

Bogoliubov Equations in Configurational Representation: Spherical Neutron Halo 

Nuclei. Phys. Rev. C 1998 , 58 (4), 2086 –2091. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.58.2086. 

(208) Zhou, S. -G.; Meng, J.; Ring, P. Spherical Relativistic Hartree Theory in a Woods -Saxon 

Basis. Phys. Rev. C 2003 , 68 (3), 034323. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.68.034323. 

(209) Zhang, K. Y.; Pan, C.; Zhang, S. Q. Optimized Dirac Woods -Saxon Basis for Covariant 

Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. C 2022 , 106 (2), 024302. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.106.024302. Page 52 of 54 

(210) Sánchez -Fernández, A.; Dobaczewski, J.; Sun, X.; Wibowo, H. Two -Center Harmonic 

Oscillator Basis for Skyrme -DFT Calculations (I): Formalism and Proof of Principle. 

Eur. Phys. J. A 2025 , 61 (6), 138. https://doi.org/10.1140/epja/s10050 -025 -01605 -6. 

(211) Osei, B.; Afanasjev, A. V.; Dalbah, A. Global Optimization of Harmonic Oscillator Basis 

in Covariant Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. C 2025 , 112 (5), 054321. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/3qp7 -qvl5. 

(212) Dick, S.; Fernandez -Serra, M. Learning from the Density to Correct Total Energy and 

Forces in First Principle Simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2019 , 151 (14), 144102. 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5114618. 

(213) Das, S.; Kanungo, B.; Paul, A.; Gavini, V. Field Theoretic Atomistics: Learning 

Thermodynamic and Variational Surrogate to Density Functional Theory. arXiv 

December 12, 2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.08782. 

(214) Song, F.; Feng, J. Neural Network Self -Consistent Fields for Density Functional Theory. 

npj Comput Mater 2026 . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -026 -02110 -0. 

(215) Thapa, B.; Oellerich, T. G.; Emelianenko, M.; Suryanarayana, P.; Mazin, I. I. Orbital -

Free Density Functionals Based on Real and Reciprocal Space Separation. npj Comput. 

Mater. 2025 , 11 (1), 149. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -025 -01643 -0. 

(216) Sun, L.; Chen, M. Multi -Channel Machine Learning Based Nonlocal Kinetic Energy 

Density Functional for Semiconductors. Electron. Struct. 2024 , 6 (4), 045006. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/2516 -1075/ad8b8c. 

(217) Golub, P.; Manzhos, S. CONUNDrum: A Program for Orbital -Free Density Functional 

Theory Calculations. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2020 , 256 , 107365. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2020.107365. 

(218) Jørgensen, P. B.; Bhowmik, A. Equivariant Graph Neural Networks for Fast Electron 

Density Estimation of Molecules, Liquids, and Solids. npj Comput. Mater. 2022 , 8 (1), 

183. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -022 -00863 -y. 

(219) Pathrudkar, S.; Taylor, S.; Keripale, A.; Gangan, A. S.; Thiagarajan, P.; Agarwal, S.; 

Marian, J.; Ghosh, S.; Banerjee, A. S. Electronic Structure Prediction of Medium and 

High Entropy Alloys across Composition Space. arXiv August 19, 2025. 

https://doi.or g/10.48550/arXiv.2410.08294. 

(220) Qiao, Z.; Christensen, A. S.; Welborn, M.; Manby, F. R.; Anandkumar, A.; Miller, T. F. 

Informing Geometric Deep Learning with Electronic Interactions to Accelerate 

Quantum Chemistry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2022 , 119 (31), e2205221119. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205221119. 

(221) Hossain, S.; Thiagarajan, P.; Pathrudkar, S.; Taylor, S.; Gangan, A. S.; Banerjee, A. S.; 

Ghosh, S. Surprisingly High Redundancy in Electronic Structure Data. arXiv July 11, 

2025. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.09001. 

(222) Li, C.; Sharir, O.; Yuan, S.; Chan, G. K. -L. Image Super -Resolution Inspired Electron 

Density Prediction. Nat. Commun. 2025 , 16 (1), 4811. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -

025 -60095 -8. 

(223) Pathrudkar, S.; Thiagarajan, P.; Agarwal, S.; Banerjee, A. S.; Ghosh, S. Electronic 

Structure Prediction of Multi -Million Atom Systems through Uncertainty Quantification 

Enabled Transfer Learning. npj Comput. Mater. 2024 , 10 (1), 175. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524 -024 -01305 -7. 

(224) Achar, S. K.; Bernasconi, L.; Johnson, J. K. Machine Learning Electron Density 

Prediction Using Weighted Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions. Nanomaterials 2023 ,

13 (12), 1853. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano13121853. 

(225) Tawfik, S. A.; Gupta, S.; Venkatesh, S. Predicting the Electron Density of Charged 

Systems Using Machine Learning. J. Phys. Chem. A 2025 , 129 (8), 2117 –2122. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.4c08583. Page 53 of 54 

(226) Zepeda -Núñez, L.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, J.; Jia, W.; Zhang, L.; Lin, L. Deep Density: 

Circumventing the Kohn -Sham Equations via Symmetry Preserving Neural Networks. 

J. Comput. Phys. 2021 , 443 , 110523. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110523. 

(227) Boys, S. F.; Linnett, J. W. Some Bilinear Convergence Characteristics of the Solutions 

of Dissymmetric Secular Equations. Proc. Royal Soc. London A 1969 , 309 (1497), 195 –

208. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1969.0037. 

(228) De Vries, H.; De Jager, C. W.; De Vries, C. Nuclear Charge -Density -Distribution 

Parameters from Elastic Electron Scattering. Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 1987 ,

36 (3), 495 –536. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092 -640X(87)90013 -1. 

(229) Dreher, B.; Friedrich, J.; Merle, K.; Rothhaas, H.; Lührs, G. The Determination of the 

Nuclear Ground State and Transition Charge Density from Measured Electron Scattering 

Data. Nuclear Physics A 1974 , 235 (1), 219 –248. https://doi.org/10.1016/0375 -

9474(74)90189 -4. 

(230) Sick, I. Model -Independent Nuclear Charge Densities from Elastic Electron Scattering. 

Nucl. Phys. A 1974 , 218 (3), 509 –541. https://doi.org/10.1016/0375 -9474(74)90039 -6. 

(231) Lv, C. -J.; Wu, T. -Y.; Wu, X. -H.; Colò, G.; Hagino, K. Basis Representation for Nuclear 

Densities from Principal Component Analysis. Phys. Lett. B 2026 , 874 , 140283. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2026.140283. 

(232) Schlipf, M.; Gygi, F. Optimization Algorithm for the Generation of ONCV 

Pseudopotentials. Computer Physics Communications 2015 , 196 , 36 –44. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2015.05.011. 

(233) Automatic Optimization of PAW Pseudopotentials . Preferred Networks Tech Blog. 

https://tech.preferred.jp/en/blog/automatic -optimization -of -paw -pseudopotentials/ 

(accessed 2026 -06 -23). 

(234) Hansel, R. A.; Brock, C. N.; Paikoff, B. C.; Tackett, A. R.; Walker, D. G. Automated 

Generation of Highly Accurate, Efficient and Transferable Pseudopotentials. Comput. 

Phys. Commun. 2015 , 196 , 267 –275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2015.06.014. 

(235) Sarkar, K.; Topsakal, M.; Holzwarth, N. A. W.; Wentzcovitch, R. M. Evolutionary 

Optimization of PAW Data -Sets for Accurate High Pressure Simulations. Journal of 

Computational Physics 2017 , 347 , 39 –55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2017.06.032. 

(236) Cohen, M. L.; Bergstresser, T. K. Band Structures and Pseudopotential Form Factors for 

Fourteen Semiconductors of the Diamond and Zinc -Blende Structures. Phys. Rev. 1966 ,

141 (2), 789 –796. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.141.789. 

(237) Phillips, J. C.; Kleinman, L. New Method for Calculating Wave Functions in Crystals 

and Molecules. Phys. Rev. 1959 , 116 (2), 287 –294. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.116.287. 

(238) Kim, R.; Son, Y. -W. Transferable Empirical Pseudopotenials from Machine Learning. 

Phys. Rev. B 2024 , 109 (4), 045153. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.109.045153. 

(239) Legrain, F.; Manzhos, S. Highly Accurate Local Pseudopotentials of Li, Na, and Mg for 

Orbital Free Density Functional Theory. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2015 , 622 , 99 –103. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2015.01.016. 

(240) Wang, Y. A.; Govind, N.; Carter, E. A. Orbital -Free Kinetic -Energy Density Functionals 

with a Density -Dependent Kernel. Phys. Rev. B 1999 , 60 (24), 16350 –16358. 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.60.16350. 

(241) Lüder, J.; Manzhos, S. Nonparametric Local Pseudopotentials with Machine Learning: 

A Tin Pseudopotential Built Using Gaussian Process Regression. J. Phys. Chem. A 2020 ,

124 (52), 11111 –11124. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.0c05723. 

(242) Woo, J.; Kim, H.; Kim, W. Y. Neural Network -Based Pseudopotential: Development of 

a Transferable Local Pseudopotential. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2022 , 24 (34), 20094 –

20103. https://doi.org/10.1039/D2CP01810A. Page 54 of 54 

(243) Ramakrishnan, R.; Dral, P. O.; Rupp, M.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum Chemistry 

Structures and Properties of 134 Kilo Molecules. Sci. Data 2014 , 1 (1), 140022. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2014.22. 

(244) Isert, C.; Atz, K.; Jiménez -Luna, J.; Schneider, G. QMugs, Quantum Mechanical 

Properties of Drug -like Molecules. Sci. Data 2022 , 9 (1), 273. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597 -022 -01390 -7. 

(245) Silvano, C.; Ielmini, D.; Ferrandi, F.; Fiorin, L.; Curzel, S.; Benini, L.; Conti, F.; 

Garofalo, A.; Zambelli, C.; Calore, E.; Schifano, S. F.; Palesi, M.; Ascia, G.; Patti, D.; 

Petra, N.; Caro, D. D.; Lavagno, L.; Urso, T.; Cardellini, V.; Cardarilli, G. C.; Birke, R.; 

Perri, S. A Survey on Deep Learning Hardware Accelerators for Heterogeneous HPC 

Platforms. ACM Comput. Surv. 2025 , 57 (11), 1 –39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3729215. 

(246) Schuman, C. D.; Kulkarni, S. R.; Parsa, M.; Mitchell, J. P.; Date, P.; Kay, B. 

Opportunities for Neuromorphic Computing Algorithms and Applications. Nat Comput 

Sci 2022 , 2 (1), 10 –19. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588 -021 -00184 -y. 

(247) Shastri, B. J.; Tait, A. N.; Ferreira de Lima, T.; Pernice, W. H. P.; Bhaskaran, H.; Wright, 

C. D.; Prucnal, P. R. Photonics for Artificial Intelligence and Neuromorphic Computing. 

Nat. Photonics 2021 , 15 (2), 102 –114. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566 -020 -00754 -y. 

(248) Thant, Y. min; Nukunudompanich, M.; Chueh, C. -C.; Ihara, M.; Manzhos, S. Neural 

Networks for Neurocomputing Circuits: A Computational Study of Tolerance to Noise 

and Activation Function Non -Uniformity When Machine Learning Materials Properties. 

Artificial Intelligence Chemistry 2025 , 3 (2), 100099. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aichem.2025.100099. 

(249) Manzhos, S.; Chen, Q. G.; Lee, W. -Y.; Heejoo, Y.; Ihara, M.; Chueh, C. -C. 

Computational Investigation of the Potential and Limitations of Machine Learning with 

Neural Network Circuits Based on Synaptic Transistors. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2024 , 15 

(27), 6974 –6985. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.4c01413. 

(250) Manzhos, S.; Ihara, M.; Lüder, J.; Chueh, C. -C.; Lee, W. -Y.; Chen, Q. G. High vs Low 

Accuracy Machine Learning Applications in Physical Sciences: Implications for 

Methods and Possibilities of Neuromorphic Computing.  人工知能学会全国大会論文 

集 2025 , JSAI2025 , 1S5GS203 -1S5GS203. 

https://doi.org/10.11517/pjsai.JSAI2025.0_1S5GS203.