Title: Aromatic Molecule Solvation in Liquid Water with Coupled Cluster Accuracy: The Balance of Pi-Interactions and Hydrophobicity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13261v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 00:22:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Aromatic Molecule Solvation in Liquid Water with Coupled Cluster Accuracy: The Balance of Pi-Interactions and Hydrophobicity 

Nore Stolte, 1, ∗ Harald Forbert, 2 Yury Lysogorskiy, 3 Ralf Drautz, 3 and Dominik Marx 1

> 1

Lehrstuhl f¨ ur Theoretische Chemie, Ruhr-Universit¨ at Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany 

> 2

Center for Solvation Science ZEMOS, Ruhr-Universit¨ at Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany 

> 3

Interdisciplinary Centre for Advanced Materials Simulation (ICAMS), Ruhr-Universit¨ at Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany 

Aromatic organic solutes in water exhibit a delicate balance between hydrophobic solvation and directional O–H · · · π hydrogen bonds, yet widely used force fields and state-of-the-art density func-tional approaches struggle to provide a consistent picture of these pivotal interactions. We introduce a data-efficient upfitting strategy to train a machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) based on the graph atomic cluster expansion for aqueous aromatic molecules with CCSD(T) accuracy for condensed phase simulations, using only finite molecular clusters. We apply our method to aqueous toluene (C 6H5CH 3). The resulting CCSD(T)-quality MLIP reproduces coupled cluster energies and forces in bulk and reveals that commonly employed methods do not capture the crucial balance between hydrophilic and hydrophobic solvation, distorting the interactions of aromatic molecules with their environment. Representative biomolecular force fields substantially understructure the hydrophobic solvation shell and misorient interfacial water, while overestimating π-contacts, yield-ing an inconsistent solvation balance. Even hybrid DFT and MP2 overestimate barriers to breaking of water– π hydrogen bonds. Our workflow provides a practical, general route to CCSD(T)-quality condensed-phase simulations of aqueous solutions, and thus constructed interaction potentials now open the door to consistent, highly accurate benchmark studies of π-contacts and hydrophobic effects in biomolecular contexts such as solvation of proteins and DNA in aqueous environments. 

INTRODUCTION 

Aromatic groups are found in proteins, nucleic acids, small-molecule ligands, and many environmental contam-inants. Their interactions with the aqueous environ-ment are central determinants of structure, intermolecu-lar bonding, and molecular recognition. The intermolec-ular interactions via the delocalized π-electrons in the aromatic ring systems are well-known to affect biomolec-ular function such as DNA double helix stabilization, protein folding, DNA–protein and protein–ligand bind-ing and recognition as well as enzyme reaction mecha-nisms [1–4]. Further, many environmental pollutants in-clude an aromatic group, and these molecules while dis-solved in water pose significant environmental challenges and complicate remediation efforts [5–7]. Although in-teractions of organic molecules with water are typically classified as hydrophobic, the extended π-orbital sys-tems of aromatic groups accept H-bonds from water molecules [8–14], thereby impacting hydrophobic solva-tion [15]. Given their ubiquity and broad implications, understanding the properties of aromatic compounds in aqueous solution is of vital importance to, among others, drug design, biotoxicity screening, and industrial waste-water treatment approaches. It is known that non-covalent intermolecular inter-actions involving π-electrons of aromatic molecules are not well-reproduced by many popular force fields [16–21] which are, nevertheless, used in a myriad of biomolecu-lar simulation studies. For example, only after custom corrections to the atomic partial charges did force field simulations of alkyl-aromatic compounds in water repro-duce experimental results [21]. When it comes to ab ini-tio molecular dynamics simulations [22] (AIMD), density functional theory (DFT) does not appear to systemati-cally correct for the discrepancies between force fields and experiment [19, 23, 24]. Polarizable force fields are able to capture, to some extent, the anisotropy in in-teraction strength of aromatic molecules [25–27], albeit at increased computational cost. A recent endeavor to include atomic-level anisotropy into all force field terms provides improvement of the radial structure of liquid benzene relative to experiment, but falls short of offering a broader agreement [28]. To resolve this fundamental problem, it has been sug-gested that calculations at quantum-chemical CCSD(T) accuracy are required in order to correctly describe aro-matic interactions with atomistic detail [4]. For suffi-ciently small finite systems, e.g., benzene or similar aro-matic compounds that are microsolvated by a few water molecules, such static correlated wave function calcula-tions are accessible since a long time [14, 29]. Yet, bulk solutions might display significantly different solvation properties to finite clusters: In the liquid state, there is competition between water–water and water–solute in-teractions, which determines both the hydrophobic sol-vation shell structure and the extent of H-bonding be-tween water and the π-electron cloud. This phenomenon has been found to generate far-ranging modulations of the solvent structure and dynamics around hydropho-bic groups [30–32]. Despite such urgent need, correlated wave function calculations for aromatic molecules in bulk liquid water at the required CCSD(T) accuracy have not arXiv:2607.13261v1 [physics.chem-ph] 14 Jul 2026 2been feasible so far. To achieve a wave-function-based description of bulk aqueous solutions at CCSD(T) accuracy represents an outstanding challenge. Machine learning interatomic po-tentials (MLIPs) present a way to circumvent the ex-pensive electronic structure calculations needed during molecular dynamics simulations, by training the MLIP to the level of theory needed for the simulation; this is now routinely done using periodic training sets from AIMD in conjunction with DFT electronic structure. Beyond DFT, MLIPs have been trained to CCSD(T) data to pro-vide an accurate description of bulk liquid water [33–35], providing excellent agreement with many experimental properties including isotopic substitution effects [36–38]. A recent work explores how to achieve a CCSD(T) de-scription that is localized in space for aqueous ion pairs by combining density functional embedding theory with machine learning [39]. Additionally, there are efforts that complement MLIP-based approaches to promote the sim-ulation accuracy of bulk water [40, 41] and aqueous solu-tions [42–44] to coupled cluster theory using various ap-proaches including many-body expansion techniques to (a) (b) 

(c) Sample training set clusters from periodic MD: 

Interatomic/intermolecular distances are scaled for subsets of homo and hetero clusters 

Compute MP2 E and F

for training set clusters: 

Train MP2 GRACE potential using energies and forces 

Compute CCSD(T) E

for training set clusters: 

Upfit CCSD(T) GRACE potential using energies only  

> FIG. 1. Scheme illustrating the training procedure of the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential for aqueous toluene. (a) The toluene molecule, showing one of the resonance struc-tures. (b) Toluene in a periodic simulation cell with 256 water molecules. The 32 water molecules with the smallest C–O dis-tances, contributing toluene-water hetero-cluster configura-tions to the training set, are highlighted. (c) Training scheme of the CCSD(T) GRACE interatomic potential; see Fig. 7 for further details.

parameterize the potential energy surface. Explicit pe-riodic coupled cluster molecular dynamics simulations of water are simply inaccessible due to the scaling of the calculation in combination with the large periodic super-cell sizes needed to describe the dynamically disordered H-bonded liquid. In stark contrast, MLIPs offer – in principle – a pathway to studying bulk aqueous systems with coupled cluster accuracy. Moving beyond pure liquid water, in particular to ad-dress the solvation of large molecular species such as aromatic organic compounds, adds significant complex-ity when aiming to train MLIPs at CCSD(T) accuracy. A key challenge to their construction relates to the refer-ence structures that make up the training set, for which coupled cluster calculations must be performed. These structures must capture the molecular variety of solvation patterns encountered in solutions as well as the cross-over to the bulk liquid, which seems to require very large solute–solvent complexes. But even with coupled cluster implementations with favorable scaling [45–47], the real-istically accessible system sizes are limited to relatively small, finite molecular complexes, with on the order of hundreds of atoms. In this work, we have developed a strategy to sys-tematically construct an exhaustively diverse training set for an MLIP with CCSD(T) accuracy for the simulation of aromatic molecules in liquid water at ambient condi-tions, using exclusively finite clusters of molecules that together describe the inhomogeneous system, in conjunc-tion with a suitable two-step approach to reach CCSD(T) accuracy. We used the graph atomic cluster expansion (GRACE) to parameterize the interatomic many-body interactions [48], and employed upfitting [49] to reach the final CCSD(T) accuracy. The entire procedure is built on correlated wave function theory, utilizing a lower-level model trained to MP2 energies and forces, and an up-fitted model trained to CCSD(T) energies, thus avoid-ing the use of DFT training data. We demonstrate in Sections S4 and S5 in the Supporting Information (SI) that the quality of CCSD(T) forces is independent of the quality of the forces provided by the lower-level model; hence upfitting from either a DFT or MP2 reference leads to CCSD(T) accuracy for both energies and forces in the bulk while exclusively using finite cluster training data. A summary of our training procedure is sketched in Fig. 1(c) while Fig. 7 unfolds details. We employ the general procedure that we developed here to train a CCSD(T) interaction potential for aque-ous toluene (C 6H5CH 3, also known as methylbenzene or toluol, Fig. 1(a)). As a widely-used commodity chemical, toluene is a volatile organic compound commonly used in chemical synthesis, as an important “BTEX compound” in gasoline, and as solvent in coatings and paints [50]. In aqueous solution, the hydration structure of toluene is affected both by hydrophobic interactions of the ben-zene ring and the methyl group, as well as the directional 30.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 

> g Ph–O  w (r)

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 4 6 8

> g Ph–H  w (r)

r (Å) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 

> g C m –O  w (r)

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 4 6 8

> g C m –H  w (r)

r (Å) OPLS/AA GAFF2 CGenFF revPBE0-D3 MP2 CCSD(T) 0.2 0.4 0.6 2 3 40.2 0.4 0.6 2 3 41.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 3 3.5 4 4.5 50.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 3 3.5 4 4.5 5rC –O m w(a) 

(b) 

(e) 

(f) 

(c) 

(d) 

(g) 

(h) rPh–O wrC –H m wrPh–H w      

> FIG. 2. Radial structure of aqueous toluene from simulations with classical nuclei using the CCSD(T), MP2, and revPBE0-D3 GRACE interatomic potentials, and CGenFF, GAFF2, and OPLS/AA force fields. The RDFs are computed with respect to the center of mass of the carbon atoms in the ring, denoted Ph, and the methyl carbon atom, denoted C m.Water oxygen atoms and hydrogen atoms are referred to as O wand H w, respectively. Insets in (a) and (e) illustrate the relevant coordinates. (a) Ph–O wRDF. (b) Zoom of the shaded area in (a). (c) Ph–H wRDF. (d) Zoom of the shaded area in (c). (e) C m–O wRDF. (f) Zoom of the shaded area in (e). (g) C m–H wRDF. (h) Zoom of the shaded area in (g). The RDFs use a binwidth of 0.04 ˚ A, and curves are not smoothed.

O–H · · · π hydrogen bonds with water molecules which in-volve the aromatic π-system. Therefore, aqueous toluene is a prototypical molecule with both a bulky aliphatic, hydrophobic group and an aromatic π-system, both of which are ubiquitously present for instance in proteins and DNA/RNA nucleobases. For these reasons, we con-sider toluene to be the archetype molecule to investigate 

in nuce the role of non-covalent π-bonds and hydropho-bic interactions of biomolecules with aqueous environ-ments. Our MLIP reproduces CCSD(T) accuracy for bulk aqueous toluene at ambient conditions, and is used to study the subtle hydrophobic and π-interactions in-volved in the hydration of toluene, including the impact of nuclear quantum effects. 

> RESULTS Toluene solvation structure

We computed radial distribution functions (RDFs) of water oxygen and hydrogen atoms, denoted O w and H w,respectively, with respect to the methyl carbon atom of toluene (C m) and the center of mass of the carbon atoms in the aromatic ring, denoted Ph (for phenyl), as a geometric proxy for the center of the π-system of toluene. The RDFs that probe water molecules near the 

π-system reveal that all interaction potentials considered qualitatively predict H-bonding of water to the π-system (Fig. 2(a–d)), i.e., π-hydrogen bonds. Thus, the Ph–H w

RDF has a peak at shorter distances than the Ph–O w

RDF, indicating that water molecules are oriented with an O w–H w bond pointing with H w towards the center of the phenyl ring in toluene. Despite this apparent suc-cess of force field molecular dynamics (FFMD) and DFT simulations to describe π-water interactions, the height of the first peak in the Ph–H w RDF and also the depth of the subsequent minimum is found to vary greatly between the different potentials with reference to the CCSD(T) benchmark – with no clear trend across density func-tional and force field simulations. This is expected to lead to sizable differences in the free energy barrier to break and make O–H · · · π hydrogen bonds being criti-cal to the solvation of otherwise hydrophobic aromatic species in water, which we will analyze in detail below. Scrutinizing next the hydrophobic solvation of the aliphatic group, we turn to the RDFs involving the methyl carbon atom (C m) in Fig. 2(e–h). In these, there 4CCSD(T), quantum 

(c) 

(e) (f) 

(d) 

(b) (a) 

(h) CGenFF 

(g) 

(i) revPBE0 D3 

CCSD(T)                       

> FIG. 3. Solvation structure of aqueous toluene. (a) Spatial distribution function (SDF) of O watoms near toluene. Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.13 ˚ A−3(opaque) and 0.07 ˚ A−3(transparent). (b) SDF of H watoms near toluene. Isosurfaces are drawn at 0.16 ˚ A−3(opaque) and 0.11 ˚ A−3(transparent). (c) Slice of the O wSDF that contains the plane of the phenyl group. (d) Slice of the O wSDF that is perpendicular to the phenyl group and contains the methyl carbon atom, in ˚ A−3. Contour lines are drawn at intervals of 0.02 ˚ A−3in the range 0.01–0.1 ˚ A−3. (e,f) Slices of the H wSDF as in (c,d), in ˚ A−3. Contour lines are drawn at intervals of 0.04 ˚ A−3in the range 0.02–0.2 ˚ A−3. Results shown in (a–f) are obtained with the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential and classical nuclei. (g,h,i) Slices of the O wSDFs as in (c,d), from simulations using respectively the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential with quantum nuclei, the CGenFF force field with classical nuclei, and the revPBE0-D3 GRACE interaction potential with classical nuclei. The SDFs were computed w.r.t. carbon atoms of toluene, and were symmetrized w.r.t. the two symmetry planes of the carbon backbone. In these figures, hydrogen atoms are placed to guide the eye. The SDFs use a voxel side length of 0.2 ˚ A, and were smoothed using Gaussian smoothing with σ= 0 .16 ˚ A in all three dimensions.

is no distinct first peak that indicates H-bonding, and the first peak positions of the C m–O w and C m–H w RDFs are nearly the same. As in the RDFs involving the aromatic ring center, the predictions from the different FFMD and machine learning molecular dynamics (MLMD) simula-tions vary significantly – but differently from the π-water contacts. The revPBE0-D3 DFT functional describes the hydrophobic interactions better w.r.t. CCSD(T), compa-rable to MP2, while it deviates at the same time consid-erably for the π-interactions as we have seen. The force fields now all agree in significantly underestimating the first peak of the C m–O w and C m–H w RDFs relative to the CCSD(T) benchmark, and thereby underrate inter-actions of this compound with water due to hydrophobic solvation. Overall, having now access to converged reference data at quantum-chemical CCSD(T) accuracy as provided by our GRACE MLMD simulations, we must conclude that these force fields and also the advanced dispersion-corrected hybrid DFT interatomic potential all fail to provide a consistent description of the key interactions of this generic aromatic compound with water, namely hydrophobic solvation and intermolecular π-interactions. In the discussion so far, we have compared the radial structure of aqueous toluene from simulations with clas-sical nuclei. To obtain quantitative predictions, we used the CCSD(T) GRACE interatomic potential in a path in-tegral simulation, which samples the quantum mechan-ical partition function of the nuclei and thus includes nuclear quantum effects. Our simulations reveal that nuclear quantum effects are negligible for the solvation structure of toluene (Fig. S18 in the SI). Even the H-bonding peak in the Ph–H w RDF is not visually dif-ferent between the classical and the path integral sim-ulation, which is surprising on account of the relatively large extent of delocalization of light H atoms in water, especially in H-bonds [36]. The H-bond acceptor, being the π-system of toluene, is so localized that the ensemble of donated H atoms is no more delocalized than in the simulation with classical nuclei. Hence, this comparison justifies our analysis of simulations with classical nuclei to understand the variation in solvation structure of aro-matic molecules predicted using several different inter-action potentials and their comparison to the CCSD(T) 5benchmark. Going beyond radial structure, the three-dimensional solvation structure of toluene is now probed by symmetry-adapted spatial distribution functions (SDFs) obtained from CCSD(T) GRACE simulations. The SDF involves six lobes of higher water density in the equato-rial region of the phenyl ring, centered not at but rather between the toluene hydrogen atoms (Fig. 3(a–f); see Section S8 in the SI for SDFs from all simulations). It qualitatively mirrors the solvation structure of aqueous benzene found from AIMD with the PBE functional [51]. For toluene, that water cage around the aromatic ring is disrupted by the hydrophobic methyl group, near which there is a slight increase in the water density directly in line with the C–C bond relative to the rest of the first sol-vation shell. At the same time, and supporting now pre-vious findings for aqueous benzene [51, 52] at CCSD(T) accuracy, there is a density maximum for both oxygen and hydrogen above and below the phenyl ring, in the region where π-interactions play a role. The toluene sol-vation structure qualitatively reproduces that of benzene near the aromatic group, but is distorted by the steric and hydrophobic effects of the methyl group on the other side of the molecule. How are these competing solvation effects described by force fields and hybrid DFT? The toluene solvation shell from the revPBE0-D3 GRACE interaction poten-tial is understructured everywhere, except in the region of π-contacts. We also found understructuring beyond the first solvation shell by the revPBE0-D3 GRACE po-tential in the RDFs, and from the SDFs, it is clear that in particular in the plane of the phenyl ring, revPBE0-D3 provides less structuring of the liquid with reference to the CCSD(T) benchmark (Fig. 3(c) and (i)). Of the force fields under consideration, CGenFF describes best the collective interactions of aromatic carbon atoms with water, rather close to the CCSD(T) description of the π-interactions between water and toluene. At the same time, CGenFF fails to provide a consistently accurate description of those intermolecular contacts where water molecules are facing only one or two carbon atoms. Sim-ilar results regarding understructuring of the solvation shell near hydrophobic regions of toluene are found for the OPLS/AA and GAFF2 force fields, while these inter-action potentials now overstructure regions where water interacts with the π-electrons. In summary, we find that the hybrid DFT GRACE potential and force fields that represent three distinct families all provide significantly deviating results for the toluene solvation shell relative to CCSD(T) accuracy. Most critically, these interaction potentials are consis-tently unable to resolve the issue of hydrophobic solva-tion versus π–water interactions of aromatic species in aqueous solution as probed by toluene. 

> Hydrophobic solvation pattern

We have seen that there are rather large differences in the first solvation shell of the methyl group depend-ing on the interaction potential. The CGenFF model underestimates hydrophobic solvation shell structuring the most severely (Fig. 2), followed by GAFF2 and then OPLS/AA. In contrast, the π-contacts are best described by CGenFF whereas OPLS/AA now fails badly, which adds serious inconsistencies to the overall balance of the toluene–water interactions. The orientation of wa-ter molecules solvating nonpolar solutes that do not en-gage in H-bonding has been found to consist of “strad-dling” configurations [53–55], where three of the four H-bond directions per water molecule straddle the so-lute, while the fourth one points away from the solute. This leads to two distinct types of H 2O configurations, either with an O w–H w bond pointing away from the so-lute (type 1), or with both O w–H w bonds straddling the solute (type 2) (see inset in Fig. 4(c)). We analyzed the water molecules near toluene to uncover how the differ-ent potentials describe the straddling phenomenon com-pared to the CCSD(T) benchmark. The interfacial wa-ter molecules were determined independently from their H-bonding pattern by using the GITIM procedure [56] (as implemented in the Pytim package [57], based on wa-ter oxygen atoms with a Van der Waals radius of 1.58 ˚ A, and a probe sphere radius of 1.8 ˚ A). Then, interfacial wa-ter molecules were determined to be solvating either the θ0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5      

> p(cos  θ)OPLS/AA GAFF2 CGenFF revPBE0-D3 MP2 CCSD(T) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 -1 -0.5 00.5 1
> p(cos  θ)cos θ

θ

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) Type 1         

> Type 2
> FIG. 4. Probability distributions of cosine of straddling an-gles θCm··· Ow−Hw(a,b) and θPh ··· Ow−Hw(c,d) of solvating hy-drophobic water (see text). Water molecules that were deter-mined to be H-bonded to the toluene π-orbital system (Fig. 5) were excluded from the straddling angle analysis.

6methyl group or the phenyl ring, based on the O w–Ph and O w–C m distances: If dOw −Ph < d Ow −Cm , then the molecule solvated the phenyl group, and vice versa ; water molecules that donated an H-bond to toluene (see below) were excluded from the analysis. The three electronic structure-based GRACE poten-tials predict nearly identical water orientations near toluene (Fig. 4), with a peak in the straddling angles in both populations around θ ≈ 65 ◦ (cos θ ≈ 0.4) and for cos = 180 ◦ (cos θ = −1.0); these straddling angles are consistent with the illustrated configurations. The three force fields under consideration have less well-defined peaks, and the distribution of orientations of hydrophobic solvating water molecules is thus more broad, with only a slight preference for the straddling configurations. The weaker interactions between water and hydrophobic re-gions of the toluene molecule provided by the three force fields provide fewer restrictions on the orientations of wa-ter molecules in the first solvation shell than provided by the CCSD(T) benchmark. Not only is the hydrophobic solvation shell density underestimated with these force fields, but the water orientations near the hydrophobic regions are also not correctly represented, so that over-all, the solvation structure of aromatic organic molecules predicted by these popular methods is unreliable.  

> Hydrophilic π-water interactions

In all simulations, including from the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential, we find distinct H-bonded configurations near toluene, with a free energy bar-rier to the rest of the distribution of water near toluene (Fig. 5(a), Section S9 in the SI). H-bonds can be accepted on both sides of the toluene molecule, and additionally the π-orbitals (which are not explicitly mod-eled in our simulations but which contribute to the toluene–water interactions that are mapped to the nu-clear positions with the GRACE potentials) occupy a large enough space that even two water molecules can donate an H-bond to the aromatic system, at least tran-siently (Fig. 5(c–e)). From the CCSD(T) GRACE sim-ulation, we find that configurations with one accepted H-bond are the most probable, making up approximately half of all configurations, but depending on the inter-atomic potential, we find a preference for much different numbers of π-hydrogen bonds (Fig. 5(f)). We demon-strate that the number of accepted H-bonds by toluene is essentially independent of the inclusion of nuclear quan-tum effects. In stark contrast, it depends sensitively on the particular choice of interaction potential, which im-prints different “hydrophilicities” of the aromatic ring. For the fraction of H-bonded configurations, CGenFF results happen to be close to the CCSD(T) bench-mark, with a root-mean square deviation (RMSD) of 3 %. In contrast, the OPLS/AA and GAFF2 force fields severely overestimate the tendency of toluene to accept H-bonds from water via π-interactions, with especially configurations with two H-bonds being overrepresented; OPLS/AA is seen to deviate most from the CCSD(T) reference. The revPBE0-D3 GRACE potential predic-tions have an RMSD of 6 % from CCSD(T), while the 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1OPLS/AA GAFF2 CGenFF revPBE0-D3 MP2 CCSD(T) CCSD(T), quantum 

> p(N)

01234(b) 

(c) (d) (e) 

(f) 

(a)                   

> FIG. 5. Hydrogen bonding between the π-system of toluene and water. (a) Joint probability density of the cosine of the angle in O w–H w· · · Ph triplets ( θOw−Hw··· Ph ), and the Ph · · · Hwdistance, from the CCSD(T) MLMD simulation. Ph denotes the center of mass of the carbon atoms in the phenyl ring of toluene. The joint probability density is normalized w.r.t. the probability of a random distribution. Contour lines are drawn at intervals of 0.7 starting at 0.3. The red dashed line is the separatrix that defines H-bonded configurations; it connects the minimum along the x-axis (linear configurations) and the saddle point between the maximum in the bottom left and the rest of the distribution. (b) Isosurfaces showing the location of O win water molecules that donate on aver-age 0.15 (transparent blue) and 0.6 (opaque red) H-bonds to toluene, computed from the CCSD(T) GRACE simulation. The right figure shows a slice through the three-dimensional distribution on the left, with contour lines drawn at intervals of 0.2 starting at 0.1. The three-dimensional distribution was calculated using voxels of side length 0.2 ˚ A, and Gaussian smoothing with σ= 0 .16 ˚ A in all three dimensions was ap-plied. (c–e) Snapshots of water molecules donating H-bonds to the π-system of toluene. (f) Stacked bar plot showing the probability pof NH-bonds being donated to the π-system of toluene, for the different FFMD and MLMD simulations.

7MP2 GRACE potential achieves agreement within 2 %. Importantly, the hybrid DFT functional overestimates the importance of π solvation shells with two accepted H-bonds, but underestimates at the same time solvation patterns without any π-hydrogen bonds (Fig. 5(f)). This leads to a misrepresentation of the “hydrophilic” toluene-water H-bonding pattern that is mediated by the non-covalent π-interactions due the aromatic ring. Overall, the number of π-hydrogen bonds formed be-tween water and toluene is strongly dependent on the interaction potential. That is challenging in particular for the description of biomolecular systems, which are typically modeled using force fields, and where solvent– solute H-bonds are of determining importance in for ex-ample ligand binding and protein folding in view of the subtle balance of “hydrophilic” versus “hydrophobic” sol-vation. We demonstrate that predictive simulations of such systems are not possible using these representatives of three commonly employed force field families, and even hybrid DFT predictions fall short in providing quantita-tive agreement with CCSD(T).  

> Solvation free energy barriers due to π-water interactions

To shed light on the stability of the π-hydrogen bonds and thus exchange of “hydrophilic water”, we assess the solvation free energy barriers predicted by the differ-ent interaction potentials (Fig. 6). The CCSD(T) ref-erence predicts a free energy barrier of approximately 0.57 kJ/mol in the Ph–H w coordinate, but there is es-sentially no barrier in the Ph–O w coordinate. In other words, there is no barrier to breaking of the H-bond through diffusion of the water molecule, but only through rotation of the O w–H w bond w.r.t. the plane of the phenyl ring. Based on the solvation properties of aque-ous toluene (Fig. 3(a–f)), we speculate that exchange of water molecules near the π-orbitals occurs primarily by molecules moving from or into one of the six lobes of higher water density that surround the phenyl ring. It happens that the CGenFF force field yields the best free energy profiles of the force fields compared to CCSD(T), in addition to it closely reproducing the H-bonding pat-tern (Fig. 5(f)). The OPLS/AA and GAFF2 force fields grossly overestimate the barrier to H-bond breaking in both coordinates, which aligns with the finding that these two force fields severely overpredict hydrophilic solva-tion of the phenyl ring by one and two water molecules (Fig. 5(f)). The two electronic structure methods under consid-eration in addition to CCSD(T), namely revPBE0-D3 and MP2, predict much too large free energy barriers to breaking of the π-hydrogen bonds relative to CCSD(T), by roughly a factor of two. In the Ph–H w coordinate, the MP2 GRACE potential has a free energy barrier 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 Ph–O w             

> ΔF(r) (kJ/mol) Cm–O w0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 Ph–H w
> ΔF(r) (kJ/mol)
> r(Å) 4.0 5.0 6.0 Cm–H w
> r(Å) OPLS/AA GAFF2 CGenFF revPBE0-D3 MP2 CCSD(T)

(a) (b) 

(c) (d)    

> FIG. 6. Free energy profiles along the (a) Ph–O w, (b) C m–O w,(c) Ph–H wand (d) C m–H wdistances of aqueous toluene, from simulations with the CCSD(T), MP2, and revPBE0-D3 GRACE interaction potentials, and CGenFF, GAFF2, and OPLS/AA force fields. The radial bin size is 0.04 ˚ A, and curves are not smoothed. Refer to insets of Fig. 2 for defini-tions of the relevant coordinates.

of approximately 1.12 kJ/mol, while the revPBE0-D3 GRACE potential yields a barrier of ≈ 0.83 kJ/mol. The trend is reversed for the Ph–O w coordinate, where the revPBE0-D3 GRACE potential has a larger barrier than MP2, whereas CCSD(T) provides an essentially bar-rierless pathway instead. Thus, in both coordinates, both methods markedly overestimate the barrier rela-tive to CCSD(T), impacting H-bond dynamics and possi-bly H-bond breaking mechanisms. In conclusion, predic-tions of solvation shell water dynamics near π-systems of aromatic molecules and exchange of hydrophilic wa-ter in contact with aromatic rings are strongly method-dependent, as our data show w.r.t. CCSD(T). The trend in the free energy barriers for hydropho-bic water exchange (along the C m–O w and C m–H w co-ordinates involving the methyl group) is different to the trend for exchange of π-hydrogen bonded “hydrophilic” water (i.e., in the coordinates involving the Ph center) (Fig. 6(b,d)): Now, the CCSD(T) GRACE potential has the largest barriers, and the CGenFF force field predicts the smallest ones. The picture that is painted suggests that these rather simple yet popular force fields that rely on isotropic interatomic Lennard-Jones and electro-8static interactions do not capture the anisotropy in in-teraction strength that in reality exists in molecules with delocalized electronic orbitals, such as the aromatic sys-tem in toluene. The force fields must therefore strike a balance between providing enough attractive interac-tions between solute and solvent so that water molecules that only “see” a few atoms of the solute (here, water molecules in the plane of the phenyl ring of toluene and near the methyl group) are sufficiently localized, while water molecules that are directly on top of a π-system (here, water molecules located directly above the center of the phenyl ring of toluene) and thus interact with many solute atoms at once are not too strongly attracted. For that reason, it is challenging if not impossible to accu-rately describe all types of solvating water molecules near organic solutes with various kinds of solute–solvent in-teractions using such simple force fields, which therefore distort the interactions of aromatic molecules with sol-vating water. Systematic improvements can be achieved by introducing anisotropic descriptions [25]. Still, even dispersion-corrected hybrid DFT, namely the revPBE0-D3 GRACE potential, yields a grossly unbalanced de-scription of hydrophilic versus hydrophobic interactions of aromatic compounds in water: While hydrophobic sol-vation of the methyl group is rather well-described com-pared to CCSD(T), the DFT functional evidently fails to get π-hydrogen bonding of the aromatic group and thus its hydrophilic solvation right. 

> DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we generated a machine learning interac-tion potential (MLIP) based on the graph atomic cluster expansion (GRACE) that reproduces quantum-chemical CCSD(T) accuracy for simulations of toluene in bulk liquid water at ambient conditions. This specific com-pound has been selected as a prototypical representa-tive of molecular species that offer both aliphatic and aromatic regions that are in contact with what is often called “hydrophobic” and “hydrophilic” solvation water, respectively. We demonstrate that upfitting from PBE DFT or MP2 GRACE potentials reproduces CCSD(T) energies and forces for bulk aqueous solution of toluene. With our highly accurate interaction potential, we deter-mined the complex solvation structure of aqueous toluene with a focus on the antagonistic hydrophobic interactions and π-hydrogen bonding of the respective aliphatic and aromatic functional groups of toluene and water. Comparing now these well-converged CCSD(T) bench-mark data – unavailable before – to results obtained from hybrid density functional and several force field-based simulations, namely revPBE0-D3, CGenFF, GAFF2, and OPLS/AA, we find that none of these widely-used methods is able to correctly describe the essential hy-drophobic interactions and non-covalent π-bonding with water that govern solvation of aliphatic and aromatic compounds. Importantly, the specific failures of the dif-ferent interaction potentials do not follow any trend but are overall erratic and incoherent, yielding close matches with CCSD(T) for some properties but glaring deviations for others. For instance, the broadly accepted dispersion-corrected hybrid revPBE0-D3 functional overestimates free energy barriers to breaking of π-hydrogen bonds by close to a factor of two, implying too slow H-bond dy-namics and suppressed hydrophilic water exchange near the π-electron system of the aromatic ring. Further, even the solvation pattern of the aromatic π-system is ill-described: The importance of accepting two H-bonds is overestimated relative to the CCSD(T) reference while solvation by fewer water molecules is underpredicted. At the same time the hydrophobic solvation shell with its straddling water arrangement around the methyl group is rather well-represented by the hybrid functional. Over-all, we reveal an inconsistent accuracy that leads to an in-congruous description of hydrophobic versus hydrophilic solvation of aliphatic and aromatic functional groups of organics in aqueous environments, as predicted by this robust DFT functional that is widely used in water re-search. Assessing next the quality of force fields that repre-sent three distinct families confirms the DFT picture: No consistent match with respect to CCSD(T) data is found for a single case. For π-hydrogen bonds, CGenFF shows remarkable agreement with the benchmark, while OPLS/AA and GAFF2 unacceptably overestimate the corresponding free energy barrier for water exchange, and, accordingly, also overestimate the total number of hydrophilic water molecules that are H-bonded to the aromatic ring. In contrast, CGenFF is the worst force field when it comes to reproducing the hydrophobic sol-vation shell around the aliphatic group, underestimating the exchange free energy for hydrophobic water by far, whereas, for this property, OPLS/AA and GAFF2 come closer to CCSD(T). We therefore must conclude that these force field families all fail to provide a consistent description of the key interactions of this generic organic compound with water, namely hydrophobic interactions and intermolecular π-contacts. Based on these insights, one might question the accuracy and predictive power of biomolecular simulations where hydrophobic interfaces and local H-bonds are of determining importance, for example in biomolecular recognition-based phenomena which hinge on the very balance of hydrophilic versus hydrophobic solvation. Non-polarizable force fields relying on isotropic Van der Waals and electrostatic intermolecular interactions, such as the representatives examined here, do not cap-ture the anisotropy of aromatic molecules interacting with water, as judged by one-to-one comparisons to now-available CCSD(T) benchmark data for the condensed phase. Fundamentally, if the hydrophobic interactions 9are parameterized correctly by such a force field, then hydrophilic interactions with π-systems are severely over-estimated, and vice versa . We observe exactly this trend in our simulations that scrutinize three complementary such force fields that are very ubiquitously used in large-scale investigations of biomolecular processes. Thanks to our accurate CCSD(T) reference, we show that the water density near the π-orbital system of the aromatic ring is decreasing from OPLS/AA to GAFF2 to CGenFF, with the CGenFF force field providing results closest to CCSD(T); the first solvation shell of the methyl group follows the same trend, but in this case OPLS/AA pro-vides results closest to CCSD(T). Improving such non-polarizable force fields for one kind of intermolecular in-teraction of the anisotropic molecule evidently deterio-rates their description for other non-covalent interactions in a significant way. What is more, none of the three force field families capture the decisive straddling orientations of hydrophobic water correctly, further providing evi-dence that describing both hydrophilic and hydrophobic water around multifunctional organic compounds leads to irreconcilable errors. In sum, the errors of such force fields preclude their use in accurate simulations of molec-ular species in which hydrophobic groups as well as aro-matic rings are exposed to water. Beyond the specific case, the distinct solvation proper-ties of hydrophobic versus aromatic functional groups are important in proteins, nucleic acids, and small-molecule ligands. Overbinding of water molecules at π-orbitals could affect binding free energies, altering conforma-tional equilibria, and leads to slower water exchange near aromatic groups, changing for example ligand residence times or water-mediated π-stacking. Understructuring of the water solvation shell near hydrophobic groups on the other hand could alter hydrophobic aggregation and collapse, crucial for the correct description of protein folding and membrane formation. An accurate descrip-tion of biochemical compounds in water thus requires both aromatic and hydrophobic water contacts to be cor-rectly represented. Only interaction potentials that re-cover the CCSD(T) balance between π-interactions and hydrophobic interactions can be considered predictive for biomolecular simulations. Given the evidence that three important force field families fail to reliably describe both hydrophobic and hydrophilic contacts already at the level of chemically simple aqueous organic molecules, it is suggested that fundamental improvement of biomolecular force fields can only be offered by polarizable force fields that in-corporate anisotropy [25–28] or more flexible models, including MLIPs, fitted to reproduce correlated wave function calculations [42]. The training set construction workflow that we present in this work, together with the GRACE machine learning methodology, represents a general, practical, and transferable approach to train-ing MLIPs for aqueous solutes with CCSD(T) accuracy. For those extended molecules where long-range charge transfer is expected to be important, explicit inclusion of electrostatic interactions in the machine learning inter-atomic potential will be needed [58, 59]. Our strategy will enable quantitative insights into the solvation structural dynamics of chemical and biomolecular species from envi-ronmentally to biologically relevant settings. In this way, we systematically close the accuracy gap between state-of-the-art electronic structure calculations and molecular simulation for aromatic solvation, and provide a rigorous benchmark for force fields and DFT-based simulations of aqueous solutes that include aromatic functionalities, from residues in proteins to nucleic acids to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 

> METHODS Machine learning interatomic potential training

A detailed description of the training and validation of the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential for aqueous toluene, as well as the revPBE0-D3 and MP2 GRACE interaction potentials for which we report results, is in-cluded in the SI. To provide the basis for our CCSD(T) upfitting strategy that is exclusively based on using fi-nite cluster data, in the SI we demonstrate first, using more economical DFT calculations in a “mock training procedure” detailed in Section S1, that our methodol-ogy results in an MLIP that perfectly reproduces struc-tural properties for aqueous toluene from periodic ref-erence simulations. We achieved a GRACE potential for dispersion-corrected hybrid DFT revPBE0-D3 [60– 63] calculations through upfitting of a GRACE potential trained to PBE DFT [64] energies and forces of finite homo- and hetero-clusters of water and aqueous toluene containing 1–64 molecules, using exclusively revPBE0-D3 energies (see Section S4). Here, we selected revPBE0-D3 since it is a widely used functional to reliably describe H-bonding and aqueous systems. Given the purpose, we chose the GGA-quality PBE functional without any dispersion correction as the starting point to validate our upfitting procedure because it provides a very dif-ferent description of water and aqueous solutions than revPBE0-D3, thus demonstrating that our upfitting ap-proach correctly moves the simple PBE GRACE poten-tial to the level of dispersion-corrected hybrid DFT accu-racy. Importantly, the finite cluster training structures consist of atomic configurations extracted from periodic simulations of neat water and aqueous toluene. To subsequently achieve the CCSD(T) quality poten-tial for aqueous toluene, we first trained a GRACE in-teraction potential to MP2 accuracy using a training set of finite clusters labeled with MP2 energies and forces. We then constructed a smaller training set of such finite clusters and performed CCSD(T) energy calculations for 10 Et       

> MP2 Sample clusters from periodic MD simulations
> Scale distances for subsets of clusters
> MP2 Eand F
> Train MP2 GRACE potential using cluster Eand F
> Training set clusters
> Upfit to CCSD(T) using cluster EEt
> MP2 CCSD(T)

# ... 

# ...  

> Hψ = Eψ
> CCSD(T) E
> Training set clusters
> Hψ = Eψ

# ... 

(b) 

(c) 

(a)                 

> FIG. 7. Scheme illustrating the training procedure of the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential for aqueous toluene. (a) Training set structures generation scheme based on homo-and hetero-clusters of toluene and water molecules. (b) Training procedure of the MP2 GRACE interaction po-tential, which used MP2 energies and forces computed for the training set structures. (c) Upfitting procedure of the CCSD(T) GRACE interaction potential, which exclusively used CCSD(T) energies for the training set structures.

those. Starting from the MP2 GRACE potential, we trained a CCSD(T) GRACE potential using upfitting, employing only energies of finite cluster data; Fig. 7 sum-marizes the procedure. In the SI, we report end-to-end testing results that verify the quality of our trained po-tentials. Notably, we also demonstrate therein that the forces provided by the upfitted CCSD(T) potential do not depend on the quality of the starting potential, here MP2. Nevertheless, here our final procedure to train GRACE potentials for aqueous solutions at CCSD(T) accuracy does not make use of DFT data. For training we employed the gracemaker code [48, 49, 65]. The GRACE models use a 2-layer architecture with the pre-set “large” complexity, and a 5 ˚ A cutoff. We used a 9:1 train:test split during training, and the final model is that with the smallest test loss after 1500 optimization epochs. 

> Reference calculations

Reference calculations were carried out with ORCA [66, 67] for correlated wave function calculations, and 

CP2K [68–71] for DFT. Correlated wave function calcu-lations that formed the basis for our GRACE poten-tials used the DLPNO-CCSD(T) [47, 72] and DLPNO-MP2 [73, 74] methodology, as comprehensively validated for the present application in Sections S5 and S3, re-spectively. The DLPNO-CCSD(T) calculations used the def2-TZVPP orbital basis for the DLPNO-CCSD(T) cal-culation, and def2-QZVPP basis for the Hartree-Fock en-ergy. 

> Simulations

We performed 3 ns long molecular dynamics simu-lations of a toluene molecule in a periodic simulation cell with 256 H 2O in the NVT ensemble, at 298.15 K and with volume corresponding to the experimental den-sity of the solution [75] at 1 atm. To obtain the in-teratomic forces underlying the reported simulations, we used in the first place our GRACE interaction po-tentials based on DLPNO-CCSD(T) and DLPNO-MP2 correlated wave function calculations, as well as the revPBE0-D3 GRACE interaction potential. Finally, three widely used biomolecular force fields were used in simulations, namely GAFF2 [76] with TIP3P wa-ter [77], CGenFF [78] with CHARMM-modified TIP3P water [79], and OPLS/AA [80, 81] with TIP4P wa-ter [77, 82], to represent three complementary force field families with extensive optimization histories. To assess nuclear quantum effects we carried out a 500 ps long path integral simulation [22] of aqueous toluene using the CCSD(T) GRACE potential at the same conditions with the PILE thermostat [83], with a Trotter discretization of 32. We used GROMACS [84] for the FFMD simulations, and CP2K [71] with our interface to gracemaker and its path integral module [70, 85] for the MLMD simulations. More details are provided in Section S2. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the pa-per are present in the paper and/or the Supporting In-formation. 

> SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Description of the GRACE training procedures, de-tails of the electronic structure calculations, validation of the DLPNO-CCSD(T) calculations, end-to-end vali-dation of the GRACE interatomic potentials, details of 11 the simulations, assessments of finite size effects and nu-clear quantum effects, spatial distribution functions and H-bond donor distributions from all simulations. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We are grateful to Frank Neese for most valuable dis-cussions and suggestions on DLPNO-CCSD(T) calcula-tions. Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2033 – 390677874 – RE-SOLV. All computations have been carried out locally at HPC@ZEMOS, HPC-RESOLV, and BOVILAB@RUB.  

> ∗

nore.stolte@theochem.rub.de [1] T. Steiner and G. Koellner, Hydrogen bonds with π-acceptors in proteins: Frequencies and role in stabilizing local 3D structures, J. Mol. Biol. 305 , 535 (2001). [2] E. A. Meyer, R. K. Castellano, and F. Diederich, Inter-actions with aromatic rings in chemical and biological recognition, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 42 , 1210 (2003). [3] L. M. Salonen, M. Ellermann, and F. Diederich, Aromatic rings in chemical and biological recognition: Energetics and structures, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 50 , 4808 (2011). [4] K. E. Riley and P. Hobza, On the importance and origin of aromatic interactions in chemistry and biodisciplines, Acc. Chem. Res. 46 , 927 (2013). [5] I. C. Ossai, A. Ahmed, A. Hassan, and F. S. Hamid, Re-mediation of soil and water contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbon: A review, Environ. Technol. Innov. 17 ,100526 (2020). [6] S. Dutta, S. Adhikary, S. Bhattacharya, D. Roy, S. Chatterjee, A. Chakraborty, D. Banerjee, A. Ganguly, S. Nanda, and P. Rajak, Contamination of textile dyes in aquatic environment: Adverse impacts on aquatic ecosys-tem and human health, and its management using biore-mediation, J. Environ. Manage. 353 , 120103 (2024). [7] H. Tang, Y. Liu, X. Wu, R. Yang, X. Liu, Z. Yang, A. Zhang, Z. Liu, and Z. Li, Research progress on micro-bial metabolism of aromatic compounds in biochemical treatment system of coal chemical wastewater: Metabolic characteristics, stress resistance mechanisms, and system regulation, Chem. Eng. J. 530 , 173608 (2026). [8] S. Suzuki, P. G. Green, R. E. Bumgarner, S. Dasgupta, W. A. Goddard, III, and G. A. Blake, Benzene forms hydrogen bonds with water, Science 257 , 942 (1992). [9] S. Tsuzuki, K. Honda, T. Uchimaru, M. Mikami, and K. Tanabe, Origin of the attraction and directionality of the NH/ π interaction: Comparison with OH/ π and CH/ π interactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122 , 11450 (2000). [10] E. Arunan, G. R. Desiraju, R. A. Klein, J. Sadlej, S. Scheiner, I. Alkorta, D. C. Clary, R. H. Crabtree, J. J. Dannenberg, P. Hobza, H. G. Kjaergaard, A. C. Legon, B. Mennucci, and D. J. Nesbitt, Defining the hydrogen bond: An account (IUPAC technical report), Pure Appl. Chem. 83 , 1619 (2011). [11] E. Arunan, G. R. Desiraju, R. A. Klein, J. Sadlej, S. Scheiner, I. Alkorta, D. C. Clary, R. H. Crabtree, J. J. Dannenber, P. Hobza, H. G. Kjaergaard, A. C. Legon, B. Mennucci, and D. J. Nesbitt, Definition of the hydro-gen bond (IUPAC recommendations 2011), Pure Appl. Chem. 83 , 1637 (2011). [12] K. P. Gierszal, J. G. Davis, M. D. Hands, D. S. Wilcox, L. V. Slipchenko, and D. Ben-Amotz, Π-hydrogen bond-ing in liquid water, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2, 2930 (2011). [13] A. Choudhary and A. Chandra, An ab initio molecular dynamics study of benzene in water at supercritical con-ditions: Structure, dynamics, and polarity of hydration shell water and the solute, J. Chem. Phys. 151 , 044508 (2019). [14] M. S. Chen, Y. Mao, A. Snider, P. Gupta, A. Montoya-Castillo, T. J. Zuehlsdorff, C. M. Isborn, and T. E. Markland, Elucidating the role of hydrogen bonding in the optical spectroscopy of the solvated green fluorescent protein chromophore: Using machine learning to estab-lish the importance of high-Level electronic structure, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 14 , 6610 (2023). [15] P. Schravendijk and N. F. A. van der Vegt, From hy-drophobic to hydrophilic solvation: An application to hydration of benzene, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 1, 643 (2005). [16] G. Chessari, C. A. Hunter, C. M. R. Low, M. J. Packer, J. G. Vinter, and C. Zonta, An evaluation of force-field treatments of aromatic interactions, Chem. Eur. J. 8,2860 (2002). [17] M. Allesch, F. C. Lightstone, E. Schwegler, and G. Galli, First principles and classical molecular dynamics simu-lations of solvated benzene, J. Chem. Phys. 128 , 014501 (2008). [18] C. D. Sherrill, B. G. Sumpter, M. O. Sinnokrot, M. S. Marshall, E. G. Hohenstein, R. C. Walker, and I. R. Gould, Assessment of standard force field models against high-quality ab initio potential curves for prototypes of 

π–π, CH/ π, and SH/ π interactions, J. Comput. Chem. 

30 , 2187 (2009). [19] R. S. Paton and J. M. Goodman, Hydrogen bonding and 

π-stacking: How reliable are force fields? A critical eval-uation of force field descriptions of nonbonded interac-tions, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 49 , 944 (2009). [20] C.-F. Fu and S. X. Tian, A comparative study for molec-ular dynamics simulations of liquid benzene, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 7, 2240 (2011). [21] N. M. Garrido, M. Jorge, A. J. Queimada, J. R. B. Gomes, I. G. Economou, and E. A. Macedo, Predicting hydration Gibbs energies of alkyl-aromatics using molec-ular simulation: A comparison of current force fields and the development of a new parameter set for accurate sol-vation data, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13 , 17384 (2011). [22] D. Marx and J. Hutter, Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics: Basic Theory and Advanced Methods (Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 2009). [23] G. Prampolini, P. R. Livotto, and I. Cacelli, Accuracy of quantum mechanically derived force-fields parameterized from dispersion-corrected DFT data: The benzene dimer as a prototype for aromatic interactions, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11 , 5182 (2015). [24] A. O. Ajala, V. Voora, N. Mardirossian, F. Furche, and F. Paesani, Assessment of density functional theory in predicting interaction energies between water and poly-cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: From water on benzene to water on graphene, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 15 , 2359 (2019). 12 

[25] A. J. Stone and S. L. Price, Some new ideas in the theory of intermolecular forces: Anisotropic atom–atom poten-tials, J. Phys. Chem. 92 , 3325 (1988). [26] J. A. Lemkul, J. Huang, B. Roux, and A. D. Mackerell, Jr., An empirical polarizable force field based on the clas-sical Drude oscillator model: Development history and recent applications, Chem. Rev. 116 , 4983 (2016). [27] C. Zhang, C. Lu, Z. Jing, C. Wu, J.-P. Piquemal, J. W. Ponder, and P. Ren, AMOEBA polarizable atomic mul-tipole force field for nucleic acids, J. Chem. Theory Com-put. 14 , 2084 (2018). [28] T. D. Janicki, M. J. van Vleet, and J. R. Schmidt, De-velopment and implementation of atomically anisotropic first-principles force fields: A benzene case study, J. Phys. Chem. A 127 , 1736 (2023). [29] K. S. Kim, P. Tarakeshwar, and J. Y. Lee, Molecular clusters of π-systems: Theoretical studies of structures, spectra, and origin of interaction energies, Chem. Rev. 

100 , 4145 (2000). [30] S. Imoto, H. Forbert, and D. Marx, Aqueous TMAO solutions as seen by theoretical THz spectroscopy: Hy-drophilic versus hydrophobic water, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20 , 6146 (2018). [31] V. Conti Nibali, S. Pezzotti, F. Sebastiani, D. R. Gal-imberti, G. Schwaab, M. Heyden, M.-P. Gaigeot, and M. Havenith, Wrapping up hydrophobic hydration: Lo-cality matters, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11 , 4809 (2020). [32] D. Das Mahanta, D. Robinson Brown, S. Pezzotti, S. Han, G. Schwaab, M. S. Shell, and M. Havenith, Local solvation structures govern the mixing thermodynamics of glycerol-water solutions, Chem. Sci. 14 , 7381 (2023). [33] J. Daru, H. Forbert, J. Behler, and D. Marx, Coupled cluster molecular dynamics of condensed phase systems enabled by machine learning potentials: Liquid water benchmark, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129 , 226001 (2022). [34] M. S. Chen, J. Lee, H.-Z. Ye, T. C. Berkelbach, D. R. Reichman, and T. E. Markland, Data-efficient machine learning potentials from transfer learning of periodic cor-related electronic structure methods: Liquid water at AFQMC, CCSD, and CCSD(T) accuracy, J. Chem. The-ory Comput. 19 , 4510 (2023). [35] N. O’Neill, B. X. Shi, W. J. Baldwin, W. C. Witt, G. Cs´ anyi, J. D. Gale, A. Michaelides, and C. Schran, Towards routine condensed phase simulations with delta-learned coupled cluster accuracy: Application to liquid water, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 21 , 11710 (2025). [36] N. Stolte, J. Daru, H. Forbert, J. Behler, and D. Marx, Nuclear quantum effects in liquid water are marginal for its average structure but significant for dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 15 , 12144 (2024). [37] D. Paschek, J. Busch, A. M. Chiramel Tony, R. Ludwig, A. Strate, N. Stolte, H. Forbert, and D. Marx, When the-ory meets experiment: What does it take to accurately predict 1H NMR dipolar relaxation rates in neat liquid water from theory?, J. Chem. Phys. 162 , 054501 (2025). [38] N. Stolte, H. Forbert, and D. Marx, Scrutinizing oxygen isotope effects in liquid water with coupled cluster accu-racy, J. Chem. Phys. 163 , 134503 (2025). [39] X. Bian and E. A. Carter, Transfer learning meets embed-ded correlated wavefunction theory for chemically accu-rate molecular simulations: Application to calcium car-bonate ion pairing, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 22 , 5174 (2026). [40] Q. Yu, C. Qu, P. L. Houston, A. Nandi, P. Pandey, R. Conte, and J. M. Bowman, A status report on “gold standard” machine-learned potentials for water, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 14 , 8077 (2023). [41] E. Palos, E. F. Bull-Vulpe, X. Zhu, H. Agnew, S. Gupta, S. Saha, and F. Paesani, Current status of the MB-pol data-driven many-body potential for predictive simula-tions of water across different phases, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 20 , 9269 (2024). [42] R. Zhou and F. Paesani, Toward chemical accuracy in biomolecular simulations through data-driven many-body potentials: II. polyalanine in water, J. Chem. The-ory Comput. 21 , 10574 (2025). [43] E. D. Boittier, S. K¨ aser, and M. Meuwly, Roadmap to CCSD(T)-quality machine-learned potentials for con-densed phase simulations, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 21 ,8683 (2025). [44] J. C. Wang, M. Upadhyay, E. D. Boittier, K. L. Cha-ton, V. Andreichev, M. Devereux, R. M. Barrios, S. Pa-tel, S. Aydin, K. T¨ opfer, and M. Meuwly, Cluster mod-els for next-generation, machine-learning-based energy functions for molecular simulations, Small Struct. 7,e202500656 (2026). [45] C. Riplinger and F. Neese, An efficient and near linear scaling pair natural orbital based local coupled cluster method, J. Chem. Phys. 138 , 034106 (2013). [46] D. G. Liakos and F. Neese, Is it possible to obtain coupled cluster quality energies at near density functional theory cost? Domain-based local pair natural orbital coupled cluster vs modern density functional theory, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11 , 4054 (2015). [47] F. Neese, M. Atanasov, G. Bistoni, D. Maganas, and S. Ye, Chemistry and quantum mechanics in 2019: Give us insight and numbers, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141 , 2814 (2019). [48] A. Bochkarev, Y. Lysogorskiy, and R. Drautz, Graph atomic cluster expansion for semilocal interactions be-yond equivariant message passing, Phys. Rev. X 14 ,021036 (2024). [49] Y. Lysogorskiy, A. Bochkarev, and R. Drautz, Graph atomic cluster expansion for foundational machine learn-ing interatomic potentials, npj Comput. Mater. 12 , 114 (2026). [50] K. Ziegler-Sylakakis, J. Fabri, U. Graeser, and T. A. Simo, Toluene, in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2019) 7th ed. [51] M. Allesch, E. Schwegler, and G. Galli, Structure of hy-drophobic hydration of benzene and hexafluorobenzene from first principles, J. Phys. Chem. B 111 , 1081 (2007). [52] A. Choudhary and A. Chandra, Spatial and orientational structure of the hydration shell of benzene in sub- and supercritical water, J. Phys. Chem. B 119 , 8600 (2015). [53] F. H. Stillinger, Structure in aqueous solutions of nonpo-lar solutes from the standpoint of scaled-particle theory, J. Solution Chem. 2, 141 (1973). [54] A. Geiger, A. Rahman, and F. H. Stillinger, Molecular dynamics study of the hydration of Lennard-Jones so-lutes, J. Chem. Phys. 70 , 263 (1979). [55] F. H. Stillinger, Water revisited, Science 209 , 451 (1980). [56] M. Sega, S. S. Kantorovich, P. Jedlovszky, and M. Jorge, The generalized identification of truly interfa-cial molecules (ITIM) algorithm for nonplanar interfaces, J. Chem. Phys. 138 , 044110 (2013). 13 

[57] M. Sega, G. Hantal, B. F´ abi´ an, and P. Jedlovszky, Pytim: A python package for the interfacial analysis of molecular simulations, J. Comput. Chem. 39 , 2118 (2018). [58] T. W. Ko, J. A. Finkler, S. Goedecker, and J. Behler, A fourth-generation high-dimensional neural network po-tential with accurate electrostatics including non-local charge transfer, Nat. Commun. 12 , 398 (2021). [59] M. Rinaldi, A. Bochkarev, Y. Lysogorskiy, and R. Drautz, Charge-constrained atomic cluster expansion, Phys. Rev. Mater. 9, 033802 (2025). [60] Y. Zhang and W. Yang, Comment on “Generalized gra-dient approximation made simple”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80 ,890 (1998). [61] C. Adamo and V. Barone, Toward reliable density func-tional methods without adjustable parameters: The PBE0 model, J. Chem. Phys. 110 , 6158 (1999). [62] L. Goerigk and S. Grimme, A thorough benchmark of density functional methods for general main group thermochemistry, kinetics, and noncovalent interactions, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13 , 6670 (2011). [63] S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, and H. Krieg, A con-sistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 ele-ments H-Pu, J. Chem. Phys. 132 , 154104 (2010). [64] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

77 , 3865 (1996). [65] https://gracemaker.readthedocs.io .[66] F. Neese, The ORCA program system, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 2, 73 (2012). [67] F. Neese, Software update: The ORCA program system—version 6.0, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 15 ,e70019 (2025). [68] J. Hutter, M. Iannuzzi, F. Schiffmann, and J. VandeVon-dele, CP2K: Atomistic simulations of condensed matter systems, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 4, 15 (2014). [69] T. D. K¨ uhne, M. Iannuzzi, M. Del Ben, V. V. Ry-bkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khal-iullin, O. Sch¨ utt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wil-helm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borˇ stnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Laz-zaro, H. Pabst, T. M¨ uller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Gl¨ oß, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. Van-deVondele, M. Krack, and J. Hutter, CP2K: An elec-tronic structure and molecular dynamics software pack-age - Quickstep: Efficient and accurate electronic struc-ture calculations, J. Chem. Phys. 152 , 194103 (2020). [70] M. Iannuzzi, J. Wilhelm, F. Stein, A. Bussy, H. El-gabarty, D. Golze, A.-S. Hehn, M. Graml, S. Marek, B. Sertcan G¨ okmen, C. Schran, H. Forbert, R. Z. Khaliullin, A. Kozhevnikov, M. Taillefumier, R. Meli, V. V. Rybkin, M. Brehm, R. Schade, O. Sch¨ utt, J. V. Pototschnig, H. Mirhosseini, A. Kn¨ upfer, D. Marx, M. Krack, J. Hutter, and T. D. K¨ uhne, The CP2K pro-gram package made simple, J. Phys. Chem. B 130 , 1237 (2026). [71] CP2K Open Source Molecular Dynamics, https://www. cp2k.org/ .[72] C. Riplinger, P. Pinski, U. Becker, E. F. Valeev, and F. Neese, Sparse maps—A systematic infrastructure for reduced-scaling electronic structure methods. II. Linear scaling domain based pair natural orbital coupled cluster theory, J. Chem. Phys. 144 , 024109 (2016). [73] P. Pinski, C. Riplinger, E. F. Valeev, and F. Neese, Sparse maps—A systematic infrastructure for reduced-scaling electronic structure methods. I. An efficient and simple linear scaling local MP2 method that uses an intermedi-ate basis of pair natural orbitals, J. Chem. Phys. 143 ,034108 (2015). [74] P. Pinski and F. Neese, Analytical gradient for the domain-based local pair natural orbital second order Møller-Plesset perturbation theory method (DLPNO-MP2), J. Chem. Phys. 150 , 164102 (2019). [75] S. Sawamura, K. Nagaoka, and T. Machikawa, Effects of pressure and temperature on the solubility of alkyl-benzenes in water: Volumetric property of hydrophobic hydration, J. Phys. Chem. B 105 , 2429 (2001). [76] J. Wang, R. M. Wolf, J. W. Caldwell, P. A. Kollman, and D. A. Case, Development and testing of a general amber force field, J. Comput. Chem. 25 , 1157 (2004). [77] W. L. Jorgensen, J. Chandrashekhar, J. D. Madura, R. W. Impey, and M. L. Klein, Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water, J. Chem. Phys. 79 , 926 (1983). [78] K. Vanommeslaeghe, E. Hatcher, C. Acharya, S. Kundu, S. Zhong, J. Shim, E. Darian, O. Guvench, P. Lopes, I. Vorobyov, and A. D. Mackerell, Jr., CHARMM general force field: A force field for drug-like molecules compati-ble with the CHARMM all-atom additive biological force fields, J. Comput. Chem. 31 , 671 (2010). [79] A. D. MacKerell, Jr., D. Bashford, M. Bellott, R. L. Dunbrack, Jr., J. D. Evanseck, M. J. Field, S. Fis-cher, J. Gao, H. Guo, S. Ha, D. Joseph-McCarthy, L. Kuchnir, K. Kuczera, F. T. K. Lau, C. Mattos, S. Michnick, T. Ngo, D. T. Nguyen, B. Prodhom, W. E. Reiher, B. Roux, M. Schlenkrich, J. C. Smith, R. Stote, J. Straub, M. Watanabe, J. Wi´ orkiewicz-Kuczera, D. Yin, and M. Karplus, All-atom empirical potential for molecular modeling and dynamics studies of proteins, J. Phys. Chem. B 102 , 3586 (1998). [80] W. L. Jorgensen, D. S. Maxwell, and J. Tirado-Rives, Development and testing of the OPLS all-atom force field on conformational energetics and properties of organic liquids, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 118 , 11225 (1996). [81] W. L. Jorgensen and J. Tirado-Rives, Potential energy functions for atomic-level simulations of water and or-ganic and biomolecular systems, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102 , 6665 (2005). [82] W. L. Jorgensen and J. D. Madura, Temperature and size dependence for Monte Carlo simulations of TIP4P water, Mol. Phys. 56 , 1381 (1985). [83] M. Ceriotti, M. Parrinello, T. E. Markland, and D. E. Manolopoulos, Efficient stochastic thermostatting of path integral molecular dynamics, J. Chem. Phys. 133 ,124104 (2010). [84] M. J. Abraham, T. Murtola, R. Schulz, S. P´ all, J. C. Smith, B. Hess, and E. Lindahl, GROMACS: High per-formance molecular simulations through multi-level par-allelism from laptops to supercomputers, SoftwareX 1-2 ,19 (2015). [85] F. Brieuc, C. Schran, F. Uhl, H. Forbert, and D. Marx, Converged quantum simulations of reactive solutes in superfluid helium: The Bochum perspective, J. Chem. Phys. 152 , 210901 (2020).