Title: Integrating moment tensor potentials with finite-element modeling for heat transfer prediction in FLiBe-based molten salt systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25803v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Jul 2026 01:19:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

Integrating moment tensor potentials with finite-element modeling for heat transfer prediction in FLiBe-based molten salt systems 

Mikhail Polovinkin, Ksenia Abramova, Oksana Rahmanova, Farit Valiev, Andrey Isakov, Andrey Goryachikh, Alexander Galashev, Yurii Zaikov, Dmitrii Maksimov, Alexander Shapeev, Nikita Rybin arXiv:2607.25803v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 28 Jul 2026 Highlights 

Integrating moment tensor potentials with finite-element modeling for heat transfer prediction in FLiBe-based molten salt systems 

Mikhail Polovinkin, Ksenia Abramova, Oksana Rahmanova, Farit Valiev, Andrey Isakov, Andrey Goryachikh, Alexander Galashev, Yurii Zaikov, Dmitrii Maksimov, Alexander Shapeev, Nikita Rybin 

• MTP-MD input bias quantified: viscosity −20–25 % vs experiment, thermal conductivity +20–30 %. 

• Multiscale framework coupling MTP-MD and FE for FLiBe molten-salt heat-transfer. 

• FE pipeline validated for pure FLiBe within 10% across flow regimes. 

• MTP-MD-driven FE predicts 8–11% heat-transfer reduction for FLiBe-LaF 3/UF 4 4 mol %. Integrating moment tensor potentials with finite-element modeling for heat transfer prediction in FLiBe-based molten salt systems 

Mikhail Polovinkin a,b,f , Ksenia Abramova c,d,f , Oksana Rahmanova c, Farit Valiev c, Andrey Isakov c, Andrey Goryachikh e,Alexander Galashev c,d , Yurii Zaikov c,d , Dmitrii Maksimov a,b , Alexander Shapeev a,b , Nikita Rybin a,b 

> aSkolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo Innovation Center, Bolshoy Bulvar, 30, Moscow, 143026, Russia
> bDigital Materials LLC, Odintsovo, Kutuzovskaya str. 4A, Moscow Region, 143001, Russia
> cInstitute of High Temperature Electrochemistry, Ural Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Academicheskaya Street, 20, Yekaterinburg, 620066, Russia
> dUral Federal University, Lenin Avenue, 51, Yekaterinburg, 620075, Russia
> eN.A. Dollezhal Research and Development Institute of Power Engineering JSC, Krasnoselskaya str., 2 /8, Moscow, 107140, Russia
> fThese authors contributed equally,

Abstract 

Molten fluoride salts are promising heat-transfer media for advanced molten salt reactors (MSRs), where reliable thermophysical property determination is critical for component design and safety. We present an integrated multiscale framework that couples machine-learning-driven atomistic simulations with finite-element (FE) modeling to predict the heat-transfer performance of FLiBe-based salts in a linear heat exchanger. At the atomistic scale, Moment Tensor Potentials (MTPs), actively trained on ab initio data, are developed for pure FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol % LiF-BeF 2 fractions), FLiBe-LaF 3, and FLiBe-UF 4.These potentials are used in molecular dynamics simulations to obtain temperature- and composition-dependent transport properties (density, viscosity, thermal conductivity, and isobaric heat capacity), which are mapped as inputs to a three-dimensional FE model of the experimental thermal loop. The FE model with reference (literature) transport properties reproduces the experimental heat-transfer behavior of pure FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % to within 10 % in the laminar regime and 18 % in the transitional and turbulent regimes, validating the end-to-end pipeline for this composition. The same model with MTP-MD-derived transport properties systematically overestimates the heat-transfer coe ffi cient by 25-28 %, an o ff set consistent with the MTP-MD biases on thermal conductivity ( +20-30 % relative to experiment) and viscosity ( −20-25 %). Applied to the ternary systems FLiBe-LaF 3 and FLiBe-UF 4 over 0-5 mol%, the MTP-MD-driven FE model predicts a mean reduction in heat-transfer e ffi ciency of 8-11 % relative to pure FLiBe, with UF 4 exhibiting the strongest e ff ect. The qualitative ordering of the three systems is the more robust result; the absolute value of the 8-11 % figure is contingent on the MTP accuracy. The framework is complementary to high-temperature experiments and provides a physics-based pathway for the rapid screening of MSR coolant formulations. 

Keywords: Molten Salts, FLiBe, Physicochemical Properties, Moment Tensor Potential, Active Learning, Heat Transfer Coe ffi cient, Finite-Element Modeling 

1. Introduction 

Molten fluoride salts, notably LiF-BeF 2 (FLiBe) and LiF-NaF-KF, are pivotal coolants for molten salt reactors (MSRs) owing to their thermal stability and chemical inertness Alberto et al. (2022); Qiu et al. (2019); Romatoski and Hu (2017). Com-putational modeling is increasingly indispensable for predict-ing thermophysical behavior and preventing thermal-hydraulic failures – including localized crystallization and flow maldistri-bution – that compromise MSR operational reliability LeBlanc (2010); Ignatiev et al. (2014); Reis et al. (2024); Deng et al. (2026). Accurate knowledge of transport properties (viscosity, thermal conductivity, and heat capacity) underpins such simu-lations, yet experimental characterization of high-temperature, corrosive melts remains resource-intensive and composition-ally constrained Rudenko et al. (2022); Serrano-López et al. (2013); Abou Dbai et al. (2020). Recent advances in machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) have enabled e ffi cient molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of molten salts at near first-principles accuracy, including FLiBe-based systems Ry-bin et al. (2024); Cockrell and Dragovi´ c (2025); Attarian et al. (2022); Li et al. (2024); Lee et al. (2021). Despite these atomistic advances, a fully validated pipeline that uses machine-learning interatomic potentials as the sole source of thermophysical inputs and quantifies the resulting sys-tematic o ff set against an independent experimental thermal loop has not been reported for FLiBe-based systems. The primary goal of this work is to establish a scalable, physics-based com-putational pathway directly linking atomic-scale interactions to engineering-scale thermal performance, enabling accelerated as-sessment and optimization of MSR coolant formulations. We present a hierarchically integrated framework that bridges this gap by coupling Moment Tensor Potential (MTP)-driven MD with three-dimensional finite-element (FE) modeling of a lin-ear heat exchanger. MTPs are parameterized for pure FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol %, LiF-BeF 2 ra-tios), FLiBe-LaF 3, and FLiBe-UF 4 melts via fitting to density-functional theory (DFT) data. The resulting temperature- and composition-dependent transport properties are mapped as in-puts to a macroscopic FE representation of an experimental thermal loop, advancing prior heat-transfer studies for MSR coolants Srivastava et al. (2013); Balderrama Prieto et al. (2026); He et al. (2022). At the continuum scale, heat transfer intensity is conven-tionally quantified by empirical closures – the Sieder-Tate, Hausen, and Petukhov-Kirillov correlations for laminar, transitional, and turbulent regimes, respectively Sieder and Tate (1936); Hausen (1959); Petukhov and Kirillov (1958 (in Russian). These cor-relations are calibrated for simple fluids under idealized con-ditions and do not account for complex salt compositions or variable channel geometries relevant to MSRs. Our FE model overcomes these limitations by resolving local thermophysical fields without empirical closures. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 3.1 presents the MTP-MD results for the transport properties of pure FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol %) and the ternary systems FLiBe–LaF 3

and FLiBe–UF 4. Section 3.2 validates the FE pipeline against the experimental thermal loop and quantifies the systematic o ff -set introduced when MTP-MD transport properties are used in place of literature values. Section 3.3 applies the framework to the ternary systems and predicts the resulting reduction in heat-transfer e ffi ciency. Section 4 summarizes the conclusions and outlines the limitations and future work. 

2. Methods 

2.1. Atomistic Modeling 

To model the heat transport properties of molten salts, it is necessary to obtain temperature dependencies of density, vis-cosity, thermal conductivity, heat capacity, di ff usion coe ffi cients. All of the aforementioned properties are accessible via the molec-ular dynamics (MD) simulations. The accuracy of the results is determined by the accuracy of the model used to describe in-teratomic interactions. Machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs) are currently the most suitable approach for model-ing molten salts owing to their accuracy and computational ef-ficiency Porter et al. (2022); Shen et al. (2025). 

2.1.1. MLIP training 

In this work, we used the Moment Tensor Potential (MTP) to describe interatomic interactions. MTP has been previously used to model various molten salt systems Attarian et al. (2022); Rybin et al. (2024); Polovinkin et al. (2026), including FLiBe and FLiNaK. Details of the MTP construction and parametriza-tion are briefly described below, and details can be found in original articles Shapeev (2016); Novikov et al. (2020); Podryabinkin et al. (2023). MTP was parametrized using the data (energies, forces act-ing on atoms, and stresses) obtained from density-functional theory (DFT) calculations. Usually, one performs ab initio MD and samples the trajectory to obtain samples for initial training set. In this work, we performed MD simulations with simula-tions cells containing 100-120 atoms for 300 ps (for each sys-tem of interest: FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol %, FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % with LaF 3 systems with ∼2 and ∼5 mol %, and FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % with UF 4 ∼2 and ∼5 mol % were considered) using a universal MLIP (MACE-MP-0 model Bata-tia et al. (2022, 2025)). These trajectories were then sampled uniformly (with 1 ps distance) and collected into two datasets containing 900 samples each: one contains pure FLiBe and FLiBe with LaF 3, whereas the other one contains pure FLiBe and FLiBe with UF 4. Universal models like MACE-MP-0 and MatterSim perform only modestly on molten salts due to solid-state training biases. Fine-tuning improves accuracy but rivals the cost of training a dedicated MTP. Given MTP’s comparable accuracy, lower MD cost, and active-learning advantages for stability and robustness, we selected it for production. Univer-sal models are retained solely for initial training-set generation, leveraging their transferability and e ffi ciency. Energies, forces acting on atoms, and stresses for each struc-ture from the aforementioned sets were then computed using DFT. These data constitute the initial training sets. DFT calcu-lations were performed with the Vienna ab initio Simulations Package (VASP version 5.4.4) Kresse and Joubert (1999) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation func-tional and projector-augmented wave (PAW) method Perdew et al. (1996). A plane-wave cuto ff energy of 600 eV was used in all calculations. Brillouin-zone sampling was restricted to the Gamma-point only (1 ×1×1 k-point mesh). Electronic occupan-cies were smeared using the Gaussian method with a smearing width of 0.05 eV. For systems containing elements with local-ized f-electrons, the DFT +U method is applied with a Hubbard U implemented in VASP Bengone et al. (2000); Rohrbach et al. (2003). Given that FLiBe is an ionic compound, accounting for long-range interactions is crucial. Previously we have shown Rybin et al. (2024) MTP trained on data including the DFT-D3 cor-rection Grimme et al. (2010, 2011) yields densities in excellent agreement with experiment, while MTP trained without the D3 correction yields a 10 % error. The functional form of MTP im-plemented in the MLIP-2 package currently lacks explicit terms for dispersion corrections. Based on our prior experience Ry-bin et al. (2024); Polovinkin et al. (2026), no substantial im-provements in energy and force convergence are expected be-yond a cuto ff radius of 5 Å. This distance is su ffi cient to in-clude several neighboring coordination shells in the liquid, as electrostatic interactions beyond this distance are negligible for FLiBe configurations due to e ff ective screening. Although in-corporating long-range interactions directly into the potential construction could, in principle, enhance simulation accuracy, such functionality has not yet been implemented in the current MTP framework. Therefore, we explicitly account for long-range dispersion interactions by employing the D3 correction in DFT calculations. We fitted (based on the Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno method) MTPs of level 16, containing 608 fitting parameters, on initial training sets. The influence of di ff erent MTP lev-els (i.e., di ff erent numbers of parameters) on the prediction of targeted properties molten salt have been previously investi-gated for FLiNaK and FLiBe Rybin et al. (2024); Attarian et al. (2022). Those studies showed that beyond level 16, increas-2ing the MTP complexity does not substantially improve agree-ment with experimental results, whereas computational costs increases significantly. Hence, for all subsequent calculations in this study, we employed the potential with level 16. Low errors do not guarantee the robustness of the potential, i.e., its ability to be used in large-scale and long-timescale MD simulations, since the potential is fitted on a limited set of struc-tures representing the potential energy surface (PES) of the sys-tem and may substantially extrapolate when applied to samples from regions of the PES that were not represented in the train-ing set. To develop an accurate and robust potential one can use active learning (AL) procedure, which not only ensures robust-ness, but also allows one to use minimal amount of data. In this work, we used an AL procedure based on the D-optimality cri-terion coupled to MaxVol algorithm Podryabinkin and Shapeev (2017). During the AL step we run a set of MD trajectories and at each step of the MD we evaluate the extrapolative be-havior of the MTP. Once structures on which the MTP heavily extrapolates are found, the MD simulation is halted and these structures are added to the training set. This is done in an itera-tive manner till no structures with high extrapolation grades are found in 150 ps MD trajectories. We also note that during AL procedure we performed MTP-MD simulations with structures containing about 8 and 12 mol % of LaF 3 or UF 4. The resulting fitting errors are reported in Tab. 1, MTP vs DFT correlation plots for energies per structure and forces acting on atoms are reported in the SI. The resulting MTPs are accurate and robust; i.e., these can be used to perform large scale MTP-MD simula-tions in order to obtain physicochemical properties.   

> Table 1: MTP fitting errors for FLiBe-UF 4and FLiBe-LaF 3systems. The en-ergy error is per training configuration (100–120 atoms); the force error is per atom per Cartesian component. RMSEs are reported in both cases.

Addition UF 4 LaF 3

Energy, eV 0.4 0.2 Force, eV /Å 93 74 

2.1.2. Physicochemical properties calculations 

We computed the temperature dependencies of the targeted properties of the molten salts FLiBe-UF 4 and FLiBe-LaF 3. At each state point (temperature-composition pair), we used 10 in-dependent MD simulations in the NPT ensemble at ambient pressure (1 bar) using the Nose-Hoover thermostat and baro-stat Nose (2002) with a 1 fs time step. Each trajectory was 1 ns long. Density was obtained by sampling the trajectories every 25 ps at each temperature. Viscosity was obtained us-ing the Green-Kubo approach Kubo (1957); Green (1954); Hess (2002); Allen and Tildesley (2017); Maginn et al. (2018) with an integration time of 25 ps, consistent with our convergence tests (reported in the SI) and with previous studies on molten salts Attarian et al. (2022); Rybin et al. (2024). The di ff usion coe ffi cients were calculated with the Einstein method Maginn et al. (2018); Porter et al. (2022). Standard errors were esti-mated from the independent MD trajectories and are reported as the uncertainty of the computed properties. Thermal conductivity was computed via the non-equilibrium Muller-Plathe method Müller-Plathe (1997) by imposing a heat flux and measuring the resulting temperature gradient in the NVE ensemble. It was demonstrated in Ref. Pan et al. (2021) that this approach yields heat transport properties in molten salts in better agreement with experimental values than the Green-Kubo method. Contrary to the conventional non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) approach, which imposes a tem-perature gradient on the system and observes the resultant heat flux, the reverse NEMD method imposes a heat flux and mea-sures the resultant temperature gradient. In the reverse NEMD algorithm, a temperature gradient is generated by periodically exchanging kinetic energy between two atoms located in di ff er-ent regions. Specifically, if a periodic simulation box is divided into N bins (where N is an even number) along a given direc-tion (for example z), the atoms with the highest kinetic energy in the first bin and the atoms with the lowest kinetic energy in the N/2+1-th bin are identified to exchange kinetic energy at regular intervals (ensuring kinetic energy conservation, even with di ff ering atomic masses). This procedure eventually es-tablishes two symmetric temperature gradients. Given that heat flux can be precisely calculated based on the exchanged kinetic energies, thermal conductivity κ can then be determined, using the following equation: 

κ = − Q

2tl xlydT /dz ,

where Q is the total kinetic energy exchanged during a time period t, and lxly is the cross-sectional area perpendicular to z

direction. The factor 2 in denominator accounts for the period-icity of the simulation box. For thermal conductivity calculations we used a time step of 1 fs and the supercell with 3136–3392 atoms (2.2 nm × 2.2 nm ×

8.8 nm) and a kinetic energy swap rate of 20 every 100 steps. For each temperature, after the initial equilibration in the NPT ensemble for 50 ps, production runs of 250 ps were performed in the NVE ensemble. At every simulated state point the results were averaged over 10 independent MD trajectories. 

2.2. Macroscopic modeling using finite-elements method 

At the continuum scale, convective heat transfer intensity can be quantified by the heat transfer coe ffi cient, governed by the similarity relation 

Nu = f (Re , Pr ) (1) where Nu , Re , and Pr are the Nusselt, Reynolds, and Prandtl numbers. Standard engineering practice relies on empirical clo-sures — the Sieder-Tate correlation for laminar flow ( Re <

2300) Sieder and Tate (1936), Hausen Hausen (1959), Petukhov-Kirillov Petukhov and Kirillov (1958 (in Russian) correlations for transitional and turbulent flow regimes ( Re > 2300). While convenient, these correlations are calibrated for simple fluids under idealized smooth-channel conditions and do not account for complex salt compositions, variable cross-sections, or cou-pled forced-natural convection — all relevant to MSR heat ex-changers. 3To overcome these limitations, our FE model resolves local thermophysical fields without relying on global empirical clo-sures, enabling detailed, composition-dependent performance assessment. A mathematical model describing the thermophysical pro-cesses occurring in the thermal test facility is developed based on the conditions and parameters of a real experimental thermal facility. Below is a description of the thermal facility’s opera-tion and experimental conditions, along with details of the de-veloped mathematical model of the digital twin of thermal fa-cility. The finite-element model is developed using COMSOL Multiphysics 6.0 COMSOL AB (2021). The model thermal test facility consists of a thin cylindri-cal steel pipe (heat exchanger) through which the heat carrier, FLiBe eutectic molten salt (66 mol % – 34 mol %), flows. The heat exchanger is surrounded by an insulation layer. Heating is achieved by Joule heating via current supplies connected to opposite ends of the heat exchanger, with the central current supply serving as a current collector. The heat carrier, at a spec-ified flow rate and a defined temperature, is supplied to the inlet of the working section. The flow rate and the magnitude of the heating power are determined based on the required flow regime: laminar, transitional, or turbulent. The materials of the components of the thermal test facility, as well as their geometric characteristics, are shown in Table 2.                        

> Table 2: The materials used in the simulation of a thermal test facility for study-ing the heat transfer characteristics of molten FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %) with a heat exchanger wall (* dis the diameter, Lis the length, His the height)
> Node Material Characteristic size* (mm)
> Heat exchanger (pipe) Steel AISI 316L d=6
> L=1200 Thermal insulation of the heat exchanger Kaolin wool 50Al 2O3- 50SiO 2
> (0.128 g /cm 3)
> d=200
> L=1200 Current supply Steel AISI 321 H=240

Fig. 1 (a) shows the full-scale computational model with predefined boundary conditions. The electrical model was con-figured using known experimentally voltage drop Vo (Table 3). The electrical current flowed from the outer electrodes toward the central one. Additionally, electrical insulation conditions are specified on all external surfaces of the model. The voltage drop Vo and the mass flow rate Qo of the coolant are the initial (input) data for the simulation. The convective heat flux boundary condition is specified on the external sur-faces of the insulation: 

−⃗n ·⃗ q = α (Tamb − Ti) , (2) where ⃗ n ·⃗ q is the heat flux vector from the wall in the ⃗ n

direction, α is the heat transfer coe ffi cient for natural convection cooling of the insulation wall (W /(m 2·K)), and Tamb = 300 K is the ambient temperature; Ti is the temperature calculated on the insulation surface (K). The melt is supplied through the right boundary (Inlet). The melt flow velocity is determined by the mass flow rate for each regime under investigation (Table 3). The left boundary has a zero excess pressure condition and functions as a "sink." To de-scribe the flow of the melt through the pipe, the Navier-Stokes 

> Figure 1: The schematic diagrams of (a) the experimental working section: 1 – resistance heaters; 2 – thermal insulation; 3 – mixing chamber; 4 – thermo-couple; 5 – current-measuring shunt; 6 – thermocouple mounting surface; 7 – working section (nominal diameter 6 mm); 8 – current leads, and (b) the model with boundary conditions applied.

equations are solved in a laminar regime (500 < Re < 1400) or using a turbulent approximation (2300 < Re < 11000). To reflect the actual construction of the facility, the Open Boundary condition is defined for the melt at the outlet of the linear section. It describes the heat flux, and its intensity is calculated as follows: 

∆H =

Z TTupstr 

Cp dT , (3) where ∆H is the enthalpy of the flow (J /kg), Cp is the iso-baric heat capacity (J /kg ·K), and Tupstr is the temperature of the upstream flow beyond the boundary at which the condition is defined (K). The complete FE-model details, including mathe-matical model, boundary condition application details and de-scription of the computational mesh development are presented in Supplementary A. 

2.2.1. Validation metrics 

The validation of the finite-element model against the ex-periment is based on three quantities: the outer-wall temper-ature profile, the local heat-transfer coe ffi cient, and the inte-grated Nu –Re criterion correlation. The local heat-transfer co-effi cient is defined as 

αloc = qTwall (y) − Tavg 

, (4) where q is the FE-computed local heat flux normal to the in-ner steel surface (W /m2), Twall (y) is the local inner-wall tem-perature (K), and Tavg is the local mass-flux-weighted cross-sectional mean bulk temperature (K). 4The Nusselt, Reynolds, and Prandtl numbers used in the criterion correlations are defined as 

Re = ρ U D 

μ , (5a) 

Pr = μ Cp

k , (5b) 

Nu = αloc Dk , (5c) where D = 6 mm is the inner pipe diameter, U is the area-averaged axial velocity, αloc is the local heat-transfer coe ffi -cient, and ρ, μ, k, Cp are the salt density, dynamic viscosity, thermal conductivity, and isobaric heat capacity, all evaluated at the local bulk temperature. 

2.3. Experimental setup 

The working section was insulated with 100 mm thick kaolin wool. A schematic diagram of the test section, including sensor locations, is presented in Fig. 1 (a). The experimental thermal test facility was instrumented with eighteen thermoelectric transducers (OWEN N 444-09.200 /5.0K.1 resistive thermometers), were deployed, with two at the inlet and two at the outlet of the test section for bulk-fluid tempera-ture measurement, and fourteen distributed along the working section for outer-wall temperature measurement (Figure 1 a). Before each measurement, the setup was conditioned to min-imize environmental influences on the accuracy of the measure-ments. The mixing chambers and current leads were indepen-dently preheated to temperatures between 823 and 1023 K in 25 K increments. The supplied power was verified by voltage and current measurements using multimeters or a wattmeter. Direct current heating of the channel employs the tube itself as a resistive heating element, which minimizes heat losses. Heat losses to the environment were determined in a sep-arate calibration run by heating the test section, while purging the tube interior with an inert atmosphere. For each temperature setpoint, the system was stabilized for one hour, after which the steady-state power required to maintain the target temperature was recorded. This recorded power was taken as the measure of heat losses, thereby accounting for parasitic heat exchange from the tube surface. During each experimental run, the working temperature was set, and melt flow was established through the model tube (length: 1200 mm , inner diameter: 6 mm) simultaneously with DC power application. The parameters that distinguish each ex-perimental run are given in Table 3. The heat-transfer coe ffi cient was derived from the inlet-to-outlet temperature di ff erence and the net power supplied.Direct measurement of the outer pipeline wall temperature made it possible to determine the local inner wall temperature Twall (y): 

Twall (y) = T outer ,exp wall (y) − qδwall 

ksteel 

, (6) where q is the heat flux density on the inner surface of the pipe (W /m2); δwall = 1 mm, is the steel wall thickness.                                

> Table 3: Initial data for the model thermal test facility (obtained from experi-ment): voltage drop Voand mass flow rate Qof the coolant FLiBe
> Regime Voltage drop Mass flow rate Tinput (K)
> V0,exp (V) Q0,exp (kg /s) Laminar flow 14.31 0.016 933 25.33 0.031 933 Turbulent flow 37.66 0.11 893 49.14 0.117 893 59.36 0.195 893 612.50 0.277 893

Current was recorded with a 75SMP1-50-0.5 shunt. Elec-trical power, inlet temperature, outlet temperature, and wall temperature were registered, with the measured power subse-quently corrected for heat losses. Electrical parameters were recorded using a multimeter Appa 506B; voltage was measured at the current-supply contacts, while tube current was deter-mined from the voltage drop across a measuring shunt. Heating current was similarly derived using a stationary shunt. Volumetric flow rate at the working-section inlet was de-termined from the time-dependent melt-level variation in the reservoir: the slope of the linear level-versus-time trend was converted to flow rate as the product of the vessel cross-sectional area and the rate of level change. These values were cross-validated against the heat-balance-derived flow rate according to: 

GT = Qw − Qs

Cp ¯ρ (Tout − Tin ) , (7) where GT is the volumetric flow rate (m 3/s); Qw is the elec-tric power supplied to the working section, corrected for heat losses (W); Qs is the power corresponding to heat losses (W); 

Cp is the specific heat capacity of the melt (J /(kg ·K)); ¯ ρ is the mean density evaluated at the arithmetic average of inlet and outlet temperatures (kg /m3); and Tout and Tin are the mean flow temperatures at the outlet and inlet (K), respectively. The heat transfer parameters were determined based on the results of thermal rig tests using the reference temperature-de-pendent properties of the FLiBe base coolant. These param-eters were subsequently used in the development of the finite-element validation model. The corresponding data are presented in Supplementary Materials. 

3. Results and Discussion 

3.1. Atomistic Modeling Results 

In this section we discuss the MTP-MD results in the fol-lowing order: local structure (RDF and coordination clusters), density, viscosity, di ff usion coe ffi cients, and thermal conductiv-ity. To assess how well the developed MTP can predict local structural features of molten FLiBe-UF 4 and FLiBe-LaF 3, we first calculated radial distribution functions (RDF). For MTP-MD simulations, the simulation cell contained 824 (FLiBe-UF 4

52 mol %) and 816 atoms (FLiBe-LaF 3 2 mol %). The use of larger supercells improves the statistical quality of the com-puted properties and MTP-MD allows performing long simu-lations, which are inaccessible by AIMD. RDFs for Li-F, Be-F, U-F, and La-F are shown in Fig. 2. RDFs for Li-F and Be-F pairs are similar for both FLiBe-UF 4 and FLiBe-LaF 3. Li-F RDF exhibits the typical behavior of liquids with the first peak at 1.85 Å. RDF for Be-F shows a sharp peak at 1.55 Å and then rapidly decays toward zero. This suggests a strong bond-ing between Be and F. On the other hand, the RDFs for U-F and La-F have a wider first peak at 2.22 Å and 2.62 Å, respectively. This result suggests that the first nearest neighbor F shell for U and La is more di ff usive and not as well defined as for Be-F, which further indicated that the bonding between U and La and F is not as strong as between Be and F. However, U coordinates F stronger than La does. To further assess the interactions be-tween U and F, we analyzed the statistical distribution of U-F coordination clusters, as shown in Fig. 3. Mostly the system contains [UF 6]−2, [UF 7]−3, [UF 8]−4, with approximately half of the U-F clusters adopting the [UF 7]−3 form. The portion of [UF 6]−2 changes from roughly 0.33 to 0.2 over the tempera-ture range from 973 to 1273 K. At the same time the portion of [UF 8]−4 clusters grows from 0.17 to 0.25 in the same tempera-ture range. Notably, a small fraction of [UF 9]−5 and [UF 10 ]−6

clusters is present. The average coordination numbers at tem-peratures of 973 K and 1273 K are 7.09 and 6.84, respectively. The obtained structural properties are in good agreement with a previous AIMD study Li et al. (2025).   

> Figure 2: Radial distribution functions in FLiBe-UF 4(2 mol %) and FLiBe-LaF 3(2 mol %), extracted from MTP-MD at temperature T =973 K for F-Li, F-Be, F-U, and F-La ion pairs.

Having established the local structure, we now turn to the temperature dependence of the density. While experimental measurements are feasible for pure FLiBe, computational mod-eling enables rapid and cost-e ff ective exploration of various salt  

> Figure 3: Distribution of clusters of UF in FLiBe-UF 4(2 mol %) computed at various temperatures.

mixtures with diverse components and compositions, for exam-ple, FLiBe-LaF 3 and FLiBe-UF 4. Performing experiments with the latter is challenging. The density of molten salts has been experimentally measured over a range of temperatures Redkin et al. (2021); Rudenko et al. (2024); Vidrio et al. (2022); Gard-ner et al. (2025), and recent e ff orts have employed MLIPs based on neural networks and MTP to calculate this property Porter et al. (2022); Pan et al. (2026); Rodriguez et al. (2021). We perform density calculations of molten FLiBe (also with LaF 3 and UF 4 additions) using the same simulation cell as for the structural analysis (comprising 784-864 atoms for FLiBe with 0-5 mol % of additions). The results, shown in Fig. 4, are in good agreement with several experimental results Redkin et al. (2021), despite not fixing experimentally-known density during the preparation of the training set. The relative errors for the pure FLiBe salt are 1-4 %. The density of both FliBe-LaF 3

and FLiBe-UF 4 molten salts linearly increases with increasing additive concentration. The e ff ect of UF 4 addition is more sig-nificant compared to that of LaF 3. Addition of 2 mol % UF 4

increases the density of FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % by 13 %, while LaF 3 only by 7 % at temperature 923 K. Both compo-sitions of pure FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol % exhibit similar density in our calculations. However, the density increases more substantially for the FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % composition upon increasing the additive concen-tration. To enable extrapolation beyond the simulated state points for the temperature- and composition-dependent density, ρ, we use a linear equation with composition-dependent coe ffi cients: 

ρ(T, m) = (ρ0 + α · m) + (b + β · m) · T, (8) where T is the temperature, m is the molar fraction of the ad-ditive (LaF 3 or UF 4), ρ0 and b are the zero-temperature inter-6cept (a fitting parameter, not a physical density at 0 K) and the temperature coe ffi cient for pure FLiBe, α and β are coe ffi cients capturing the linear variation of the corresponding coe ffi cients with composition. The fitting coe ffi cients are listed in Tab. 4. 

> Table 4: Coe ffi cients for density calculation according to equations 8 for sys-tems computed in our research.

Base salt LiF–BeF 2 66–34 74–26 Addition La U La U

ρ0, g /cm 3 2.38 2.38 2.35 2.33 

α, g /cm 3 8.75 13.66 8.17 15.24 

b · 10 4 , g /(cm 3·K) -4.24 -4.44 -4.16 -4.15 

β · 10 3, g /(cm 3·K) -2.40 -3.00 -1.16 -3.58 We next discuss the dynamic properties, viscosities of FLiBe-LaF 3 and FLiBe-UF 4 molten salts. The results of calculations are presented in Fig. 5. Calculated viscosities for pure FLiBe of both compositions are underestimated by 20-25 % on av-erage. Notably, the relative error in the calculated viscosity decreases with increasing temperature. However, the physic-ochemical trends are reproduced accurately. The viscosity de-creases with increasing temperature, and the molten salts con-taining LaF 3 and UF 4 are more viscous. Experimental measure-ments Tkacheva et al. (2022) show that, the viscosity of FLiBe 73 mol % – 27 mol % increases by 10 % upon the addition of 2 mol % UF 4. The MTP-MD predicts similar behavior with the viscosity increase of 13 % for similar molten salt composi-tions. The LaF 3 additions also increase the viscosity of FLiBe molten salts, but the e ff ect is weaker than that of UF 4 addition. The FLiBe 74 mol % – 26 mol % viscosity is lower than that of the FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol %. This can be explained by the lower BeF 2 concentration, which, according to the struc-ture analysis and literature data, forms chains and a network in the molten salt. Notably, the viscosity increase upon LaF 3 and UF 4 addition can also be attributed to the increased number of network-forming atoms in the molten salts. Viscosity, η, can be described by Arrhenius-type expression with coe ffi cients that depend on composition: 

η(T, m) = (η0 + α · m) · e E0+β·mT , (9) where T is the temperature, m is the molar fraction of the ad-ditive (LaF 3 or UF 4), η0 is the pre-exponential factor for pure FLiBe, E0 is the corresponding activation energy, α and β de-scribe the composition-induced shifts of η0 and E0. The rela-tionships between viscosity, composition, and temperature es-tablished in our work are presented in Tab. 5. The transport of mass in the melt is described by the self-di ff usion coe ffi cients. Atomic di ff usion in a melt is another fun-damental property of liquid dynamics that provides important information Rollet et al. (2009). The temperature-dependence of self-di ff usion coe ffi cients (labeled as D) for FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % with 5 mol % additions of UF 4 and LaF 3 are re-ported in Fig. 6, the corresponding data for FLiBe 74 mol %– 26 mol % composition is provided in the SI. According to our calculations, the di ff usion coe ffi cients obey the Arrhenius law, 

> Table 5: Coe ffi cients for viscosity calculation according to equations 9 for sys-tems computed in our research.

Base salt LiF–BeF 2 66–34 74–26 Addition La U La U

η0 · 10 5, Pa ·s 9.32 6.99 13.40 10.66 

α · 10 4, Pa ·s -1.82 -0.70 4.85 -10.27 

Eo, K 3728 4007 3118 3428 

β, K 3088 4477 1177 16062 the approximating coe ffi cients are reported in the SI. The di ff u-sion coe ffi cients of species are ordered as follows D Li > DF >

DBe > DU ∼ DLa . D Li is ∼ 4 times higher than D Be and D F;this is in an agreement with Be atoms forming clusters and a network structure in the melt, slowing the di ff usion. The same behavior is observed in an experimental study Mei et al. (2013). However, because the viscosity is underestimated, the calcu-lated di ff usion coe ffi cients are correspondingly higher. The same overestimation was observed in previous computational study of FLiBe Attarian et al. (2022). The La and U atoms have sim-ilar di ff usion coe ffi cients to each other, and both are even less mobile than Be atoms. The large and heavy clusters formed by these elements in the molten salt, discussed above, sup-press di ff usion. Notably, the di ff usion coe ffi cients for the FLiBe 74 mol % – 26 mol % are higher for all atomic species, that is consistent with the lower viscosity of molten salts. We now present the thermal conductivity, the most experi-mentally debated of the transport properties. Fig. 7 shows our calculated results (the linear fit parameters are listed in Tab. 6). We observe lower thermal conductivity at higher temperatures for the molten salts. The temperature dependence of thermal conductivity in molten salts remains a subject of debate in the literature. In the experimental studies Bobrova et al. (2023); Rudenko et al. (2024); Kesler and Dokutovich (2025) a posi-tive temperature dependence was reported, whereas a constant value of 1 W /(m ·K) is recommended in Ref. Williams (2006), while a negative slope of thermal conductivity versus temper-ature is observed in both computational, theoretical and exper-imental studies Zakiryanov (2024); Denisov et al. (2025); Pan et al. (2021); Yang et al. (2023). Regarding the LaF 3 and UF 4

additions, both additives decrease the thermal conductivity of molten salts. This result is in agreement with both experimen-tal and computational studies on molten salts Bobrova et al. (2023); Kesler and Dokutovich (2025); Denisov et al. (2025). This behavior can be attributed to the U-F and La-F complexes discussed above. The formation of large, heavy La-F and U-F complexes disrupts thermal transport in FLiBe by acting as massive phonon-like scattering centers. These centers sever the continuous Be-F-Be bridging network and localize vibrational energy, thereby drastically reducing the phonon mean free path Denisov et al. (2025). Despite the good qualitative agreement, we observe a non-negligible relative error in the predicted ther-mal conductivity. For all the simulated state points the thermal conductivity is overestimated by 20-30 %. Notably, the results of experimental studies can di ff er among each other by up to 50 % Yang et al. (2023). 7Figure 4: Temperature dependence of the density of molten salts, obtained with MTP-MD. (a) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-UF 4, (b) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-LaF 3, (c) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-UF 4, and (d) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-LaF 3. Comparison with the experimantal data from Redkin (2021) Redkin et al. (2021) is presented by dash-dotted lines. 

8Figure 5: Temperature dependence of the viscosity of molten salts, obtained with MTP-MD. (a) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-UF 4, (b) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-LaF 3, (c) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-UF 4, and (d) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-LaF 3. Experimental data for pure FLiBe is taken from Tkacheva (2022) Tkacheva et al. (2022). 

9Figure 6: Temperature dependence of di ff usion coe ffi cients of species in FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %) with 5 mol % additions of (a) UF 4 or (b) LaF 3.

Thermal conductivity is described using a linear equation: 

κ(T, m) = (κ0 + α · m) + β · T, (10) where T is the temperature, m is the molar fraction of the ad-ditive (LaF 3 or UF 4), κ0 is the empirical zero-temperature in-tercept (a fitting parameter with no physical meaning at actual 0 K, since FLiBe is not liquid at that temperature), α accounts for the e ff ect of composition, and β is the common temperature coe ffi cient, which is assumed to be independent of m to avoid overparameterization. 

> Table 6: Coe ffi cients for thermal conductivity calculation according to equa-tions 10 for systems computed in our research.

Base salt LiF–BeF 2 66–34 74–26 Addition La U La U

κ0, W /(m ·K) 1.42 1.54 1.67 1.58 

α, W /(m ·K) -2.22 -3.06 -2.21 -4.16 

β · 10 4, W /(m ·K2) -1.8 -3.3 -3.7 -2.9 Overall, the physicochemical properties of FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol % molten salts with addi-tions of LaF 3 or UF 4 derived from MTP-MD simulations are re-ported in terms of coe ffi cients that approximate the temperature (in the range of 870-1300 K) and composition (up to 5 mol % of LaF 3 or UF 4) dependencies. The coe ffi cients for density, vis-cosity, and thermal conductivity for the systems with UF 4 and LaF 3 are summarized in Tab. 4, Tab. 5, and Tab. 6, respectively. These equations are used in FE modeling. 

3.2. Validation of the finite-elements model 

For the validation against experiment, the transport prop-erties of FLiBe are taken from the literature (denoted FE-ref )(see Supplementary Materials). The corresponding simulation in which the same fluid is described by MTP-MD-derived prop-erties is denoted FE-MD and is reported in Section 3.1 for com-pleteness. The validation proceeds in three steps: outer-wall temper-ature, local heat-transfer coe ffi cient, and the integrated Nu –

Re criterion correlation, each compared with the correspond-ing experimental measurement. We started coupling results of the atomistic simulations with the finite-element model by per-forming a validation simulation for reference parameter – pipe wall temperature. We calculated the temperature of the outer pipe wall and compared the results with measured thermocou-ple data. The pipe wall temperature, measured experimentally and obtained from the model for regimes with Re > 500 (lami-nar) and Re > 7000 (turbulent). is shown in Fig. 8. The figure also shows similar characteristics obtained for FE-MD model. In both cases, the numerical model successfully reproduces the experimentally observed trends. The wall temperature in-creases gradually along the flow direction as the molten salt absorbs heat from the heated wall. To further validate the approach on the experimental data, which was obtained for pure FLiBe, we compared the thermo-physical parameters of the developed model with experimental data. The local heat-transfer coe ffi cient αloc and the dimension-less numbers Nu , Re , are defined in Section 2.2.1 (eq. 4 and eq. 5). Fig. 9 presents local values of the heat transfer coe ffi cients calculated in the model and obtained from the thermal test fa-cility in the experiment for regimes with 500 < Re < 1300, 3300 < Re < 6000 and 7000 < Re < 11000. The peaks ob-served in the central part of the dependencies are attributable to the presence of a steel current collector in this region, re-sulting in localized heat flux intensification. Overall, the FE-ref model shows good agreement with the experimental data across the entire investigated operating range. The most sig-nificant deviations occur at the highest flow rates, where un-certainty reaches 18 % (relative to the average experimental data). This discrepancy stems from several factors; most no-tably, the experimental data exhibit increasing scatter at higher mass flow rates. Increased linear velocity at these rates pre-10 Figure 7: Temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity of molten salts, obtained with MTP-MD. (a) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-UF 4, (b) FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %)-LaF 3, (c) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-UF 4, and (d) FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %)-LaF 3. Experimental data for pure FLiBe is taken from Bobrova (2022) Bobrova et al. (2023). 

11 Figure 8: Wall temperature along the pipe length for regimes R2 (500 <Re <1300) and R6 (7000 <Re <11000), see Table 3 for operating condi-tions. Experimental data: blue circles (R2) and purple squares (R6). FE predic-tions using experimental properties: vermilion triangles (R2) and golden orange hexagons (R6). FE predictions using MTP-MD-derived properties: green filled crosses (R2) and yellow diamonds (R6). 

vents the thermal regime from reaching a steady state, thereby increasing measurement dispersion. Conversely, the model is solved as a steady-state problem with prescribed boundary con-ditions, and therefore produces a smooth, deterministic profile of local heat transfer values along the pipe length without the statistical scatter of the experiments. Furthermore, discrepan-cies may arise from the idealized boundary conditions used in the simulations and subtle variations in actual flow condi-tions that are di ffi cult to reproduce numerically. Nevertheless, the finite-element model accurately captures both the qualita-tive trends and quantitative values of the measured parameters, validating its suitability for future heat transfer simulations of FLiBe-based molten salts with modified compositions. The figure also shows the heat exchange coe ffi cients for FE-MD model obtained with the MTP-MD results for pure FliBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %). Comparison with FE-simulation data reveals a systematic overestimation of values by an average of 25-28 %, with the magnitude of the error independent of the studied regime. As discussed in section (Section 3.1), when determining the melt transport properties, we can expect an un-certainty of up to 30 %. In particular, overestimated thermal conductivity values lead to increased heat transfer intensity be-tween the bulk and the wall layer of the coolant. The Fig. 10 shows the criterion dependencies Nu (Re ) de-rived using the Nusselt and Reynolds number values averaged along the pipe length for all regimes under investigation To jointly assess the contribution of uncertainty in the heat transfer fluid properties to the convective heat transfer parameters, the figure presents the results of the MTP-MD modeling. Similar to the local heat transfer coe ffi cient, the predicted values of the cri-terion dependencies are systematically overestimated, exhibit-   

> Figure 9: Local heat transfer coe ffi cient αloc along the pipe length for regimes R1 (500 <Re <1300), R4 (3300 <Re <6000), and R6 (7000 <Re <11000), oper-ating conditions provided in Tab. 3. Experimental data are shown by filled markers: green circles (R1), blue triangles (R4), and vermilion squares (R6). Finite-element model predictions using experimental thermophysical proper-ties are shown by solid lines in the corresponding experimental colors (green (R1), blue (R4), and vermilion (R6)). FE predictions using MTP-MD-derived properties are shown by dashed lines in alternative colors: yellow (R1), purple (R4), and golden orange (R6).

ing a shift upward and to the right relative to the experimen-tal and modeling data. The Reynolds number is overestimated by an average of 28 % (rightward shift), regardless of the flow regime. In this case, the dominant source of uncertainty is the determination of the melt viscosity. The FE modeling results can be interpreted as follows: the uncertainty observed in both the local heat transfer parameters and the averaged dimension-less characteristics is in good agreement with the uncertainty associated with calculating the heat transfer fluid properties and is independent of the flow regime. Nevertheless, the qualitative behavior predicted by the thermophysical model appears phys-ically reasonable. Therefore, the next step is to evaluate the influence of the LaF 3 and UF 4 additives on the heat transfer performance of the test rig. 

3.3. Results of the finite-elements modeling with input from atom-istic simulations 

We used results of MTP-MD to obtain the heat exchange coe ffi cients αloc and criterion correlations Nu (Re ) when FLiBe-UF 4 (0, ∼2, ∼5 mol %) and FLiBe-LaF 3 (0, ∼2, ∼5 mol %) are coolants in the digital twin model of the thermal test facility. Fig. 11 shows the calculated local heat transfer coe ffi cients 

αloc for FLiBe-UF 4 (2 mol %) and FLiBe-LaF 3 (2 mol %) mol-ten systems. Regimes correspond to the Reynolds numbers 

Re ≈ 4500 and Re ≈ 7500, respectively. As the flow tur-bulizes, the heat transfer coe ffi cient increases by about 40 %, which is consistent with the behavior of the system using the 12 Figure 10: Nusselt number ( Nu ) as a function of Reynolds number ( Re ) for all six regimes (see Table 3 for operating conditions). Data points represent values averaged along the pipe length, obtained from experiments (vermilion circles), FE modeling using experimental thermophysical properties (blue tri-angles), and FE modeling using MTP-derived properties (green squares). The dotted and dashed lines correspond to linear fits for laminar ( Re < 2300) and turbulent ( Re > 2300) regimes, respectively. 

base FLiBe melt (see Fig. 9). In terms of heat transfer e ffi -ciency reduction, the systems under study can be arranged as follows: αFLiBe > α FLiBe-LaF 3 > α FLiBe-UF 4 . Consequently, under the same coolant flow regimes, varying the coolant composition within the solubility limits of the components yields a reduction in heat transfer e ffi ciency of approximately 8% (with the addi-tion of 2 mol % LaF 3) and 10% (with the addition of 2 mol % UF 4). The addition of 5 mol % of LaF 3 and UF 4 reduces heat transfer e ffi ciency by 10% and 11%, respectively. In the classical heat transfer study Cooke and Cox (1973), key relationships connecting the Nusselt number with the Rey-nolds and Prandtl numbers were established. The experimen-tal data generalized in that work demonstrated that in laminar (Re <2300) and turbulent (2300 <Re <11000) regimes, the be-havior of the molten salt is well described by standard correla-tions (eqs. 11, 12). However, in the transition region (2300 <Re <4000), a systematic delay in the development of turbulence was identi-fied, attributed to the stabilization of the laminar boundary layer due to viscosity variations. Building on these findings, the present work compared the heat transfer data for the studied systems within the Reynolds number range from 0 to 11000 with the correlations from Cooke and Cox (1973), including Sieder-Tate equation Sieder and Tate (1936) for low Reynolds number and Hausen equation for high Reynolds number Hausen (1959) and assessed their validity un-der the conditions of our experiment. Two empirical correlations are used to interpret the Nusselt number Nu theor . The Sieder–Tate correlation eq. 11 is valid for    

> Figure 11: Local heat transfer coe ffi cient αloc along the pipe length for regimes R4 (3300 <Re <6000) and R5 (5000 <Re <8000), operating conditions provided in Tab. 3, computed for various coolants. Finite-element model predictions using MTP-MD-derived thermophysical properties are shown by solid lines for pure FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol %, FLiBe - 2 mol % LaF 3, and FLiBe - 2 mol % UF 4.

Re < 2300 (laminar); the Hausen correlation eq. 12 is valid for 2300 < Re < 11000 (transitional and turbulent): 

Nu theor = 1.86 



Re · Pr 

 DL

 1/3 μμs

!0.14 

(11) 

Nu theor = 0.116 Re 2/3 − 125  Pr 1/3 μμs

!0.14 

(12) where D is the pipe diameter, L is the pipe length, μ is the dy-namic viscosity at bulk temperature, and μs is the dynamic vis-cosity at wall temperature. The dependence of the heat transfer function (HTF) on the Reynolds number is calculated according to: HTF = Nu theor 

(Pr )1/3  μμs

0.14 . (13) Figure 12 presents our calculated results together with data estimated according to eqs. 11-12. The comparison results showed that in the laminar regimes, our data are in good agreement with eq. 11; however, in the transitional regimes, a systematic de-viation from eq. 12 is observed. The boundary layer devel-opment problem is most pronounced in the Reynolds number range from 2300 to 4000, where entrance e ff ects persist over the entire length of the thermal test section. The same e ff ect may be observed up to Re = 5000 at higher heat fluxes. Our data lie above the standard correlations in the transi-tion region but not in the laminar region. If the deviations in our data were caused by heat conducting surface films or en-trapped gas, one would expect this e ff ect to manifest across all flow regions. In the laminar region, the heat transfer function is 13 Figure 12: Heat transfer functions for the coolants: FLiBe and FLiBe con-taining 2 and 5 mol % of LaF 3 or UF 4, calculated in the model (points) and estimated from the theory (dotted lines). 

virtually una ff ected by viscosity. In contrast, under transitional and turbulent flow conditions, this dependence is pronounced. Consequently, the deviation between the HTF performance cal-culated from our model and that evaluated via eq. 13 could arise from uncertainties in the salt viscosity data at the relevant oper-ating temperatures. Furthermore, existing theoretical models do not fully describe the dependence in the transition regime, indi-cating the need for their further development and refinement. The transitional flow regime of Re = 2300-5000 is highly sensitive to the geometric parameters of the working section, which determine the magnitude of the heat flux density across the heat transfer boundary. In turn, the heat flux intensity de-termines the development of a viscous sublayer near the wall, where heat transfer is determined by the thermal conductivity of the fluid, and the flow regime is laminar. In the transient flow regime, the heat transfer intensity in the radial direction in-creases, meaning the bulk temperature of the coolant decreases but the velocities are still insu ffi cient; the viscous sublayer is su ffi ciently developed and can significantly reduce heat transfer. However, the viscous sublayer can be unstable and exhibit pul-sations, which complicates the shape of the heat transfer func-tion and increases uncertainty when operating in the transient flow ranges. 

4. Conclusions 

We have developed a hierarchically integrated multiscale framework that couples machine-learning-driven atomistic sim-ulations to continuum finite-element modeling for heat-transfer prediction in FLiBe-based molten salts. At the atomistic level, MTPs were trained for pure FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol % and 74 mol % – 26 mol % LiF-BeF 2 ratios), FLiBe-LaF 3, and FLiBe-UF 4 melts and used to compute temperature- and com-position-dependent transport properties (density, viscosity, ther-mal conductivity, and isobaric heat capacity). These properties were mapped as inputs into a three-dimensional FE model of an experimental thermal loop. The FE-ref configuration, which uses reference literature transport properties for pure FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol %, reproduces the experimental heat-transfer behavior to within 10 % in laminar regime and up to 18 % in the transitional and turbulent regimes. The end-to-end pipeline is therefore vali-dated for the 66 mol % – 34 mol % composition. The 74 mol % – 26 mol % composition is supported at the atomistic level only; its FE validation is left for future work. The FE-MD configu-ration, which uses the MTP-MD-derived transport properties of Section 3.1, systematically overestimates the heat-transfer coe ffi cient by 25–28 % and shifts the Nu –Re curve rightward by 28 %. These o ff sets are consistent with the MTP-MD bi-ases on thermal conductivity ( +20–30 % relative to experiment) and viscosity ( −20–25 %), which compound in the same di-rection to increase the predicted αloc . The qualitative ordering 

αFLiBe > α FLiBe–LaF 3 > α FLiBe–UF 4 is the more robust conclu-sion from the MTP-MD side; the absolute value of any single-component α is sensitive to the MTP accuracy. Applied to the ternary systems FLiBe-LaF 3 and FLiBe-UF 4

over the investigated compositional window (0-5 mol %), the FE-MD model predicts a mean reduction in heat-transfer e ffi -ciency of 8-11 % relative to pure FLiBe. The degradation is driven primarily by increased viscosity and decreased thermal conductivity, with UF 4-bearing melts exhibiting the most pro-nounced e ff ect. The 8-11 % range should be read as the model’s prediction given the MTP-MD biases, not as an experimental fact. A limitation of the presented end-to-end approach for quan-titatively assessing heat transfer parameters is the treatment of regimes with Re > 2300, where the FE model deviates from the Sieder–Tate and Hausen correlations. The deviation is at-tributable to two e ff ects: the MTP-MD biases on the salt trans-port properties, and the approximate treatment of boundary-layer transition by the k–ϵ model. The fact that the FE-ref con-figuration (which uses reference properties) also shows a devi-ation in the transition regime indicates that the second e ff ect is the dominant one. Refining the turbulence model and improv-ing the MTP accuracy are the two natural next steps. 

5. Data Availability 

The MTPs and FE model files generated in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable re-quest. 

Author Contributions 

Mikhail Polovinkin: methodology, investigation (developed the MTPs, conducted and processed MD modeling), valida-tion, conceptualization, data curation, writing – original draft. Ksenia Abramova: methodology, investigation (developed the FE model), validation, conceptualization, data curation, writ-ing – original draft. Oksana Rahmanova: methodology, in-vestigation, validation, conceptualization. Farit Valiev: inves-tigation, writing – original draft. Andrey Isakov: conceptu-alization. Andrey Goryachikh: conceptualization. Alexander 14 Galashev: funding acquisition, validation, conceptualization. Yurii Zaikov: conceptualization. Dmitrii Maksimov: concep-tualization, writing – original draft. Alexander Shapeev: re-sources, supervision. Nikita Rybin: conceptualization, supervi-sion, writing – review and editing. 

Acknowledgments 

Ksenia Abramova, Oksana Rahmanova, Farit Valiev, and Alexander Galashev acknowledge financial support of the Rus-sian Science Foundation, project No. 25-23-01312. 15 References 

Abou Dbai, M., Scarlat, R.O., Trujillo, M.F., 2020. Radiative heat transfer in flibe molten salt participating medium in a vertical heated tube under forced and mixed convection lam-inar flows. Nuclear Engineering and Design 368, 110775. Alberto, P., Fradera, J., Sadaba, S., Gordillo, P., Connell, J., Jones, S., Lewtas, H., Hawker, N., Echeveste, B., 2022. Pre-conceptual design of a liquid metal to molten salt heat ex-changer with a leak detection system. Fusion Engineering and Design 178, 113106. Allen, M., Tildesley, D., 2017. Computer Simulation of Liq-uids. Oxford science publications, Oxford University Press. Attarian, S., Morgan, D., Szlufarska, I., 2022. Thermophysical properties of flibe using moment tensor potentials. Journal of Molecular Liquids 368, 120803. Balderrama Prieto, S.A., Shaltry, M.R., Roper, R.V., Gakhar, R., 2026. Cfd modeling of natural circulation in licl-kcl molten salt closed loop. Applied Thermal Engineering 284. Batatia, I., Batzner, S., Kovács, D.P., Musaelian, A., Simm, G.N., Drautz, R., Ortner, C., Kozinsky, B., Csányi, G., 2025. The design space of e (3)-equivariant atom-centred inter-atomic potentials. Nature Machine Intelligence 7, 56–67. Batatia, I., Kovacs, D.P., Simm, G., Ortner, C., Csányi, G., 2022. Mace: Higher order equivariant message passing neu-ral networks for fast and accurate force fields. Advances in neural information processing systems 35, 11423–11436. Bengone, O., Alouani, M., Blöchl, P., Hugel, J., 2000. Imple-mentation of the projector augmented-wave lda + u method: Application to the electronic structure of nio. Physical Re-view B 62, 16392. Bobrova, K., Dokutovich, V., Mushnikov, P., 2023. Thermo-physical properties of several molten mixtures of the lif– bef2–uf4 system. Russian Metallurgy (Metally) 2023, 126– 135. Cockrell, C., Dragovi´ c, A., 2025. Heat transport and ionic dy-namics in pure and mixed molten salts. Physics of Fluids 37. COMSOL AB, 2021. COMSOL Multiphysics ® v. 6.0. URL: 

https://www.comsol.com/ .Cooke, J.W., Cox, B.D., 1973. Forced-convection heat-transfer measurements with a molten fluoride salt mixture flowing in a smooth tube. Technical Report ORNL /TM-4284. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Deng, H., Zhou, C., Wang, S., Xue, S., Huang, P., Yu, H., 2026. Flow and heat transfer characteristics in molten salt reactor core channels under the coupled influence of wall heat flux and volumetric internal heat generation. Annals of Nuclear Energy 227, 111930. Denisov, E., Rakhmanova, O., Zakiryanov, D., Galashev, A., 2025. Thermal conductivity coe ffi cients of flinak melt with lanthanide and actinide fluoride additives: A molecular dy-namic study. International Journal of Thermophysics 46, 127. Edwards, J.D., Taylor, C.S., Russell, A.S., Maranville, L.F., 1952. Electrical conductivity of molten cryolite and potas-sium, sodium, and lithium chlorides. Journal of the Electro-chemical Society 99, 527–535. Gardner, D.N., Denis, M., Borrello, M., Sclafani, C., Scarlat, R.O., 2025. The e ff ect of complex forming cations on the thermophysical properties of beryllium and uranium fluoride salts for nuclear reactor applications. ACS Physical Chem-istry Au 5, 579–588. Green, M.S., 1954. Marko ff random processes and the statisti-cal mechanics of time-dependent phenomena. ii. irreversible processes in fluids. The Journal of Chemical Physics 22, 398–413. Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S., Krieg, H., 2010. A consis-tent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density func-tional dispersion correction (dft-d) for the 94 elements h-pu. The Journal of chemical physics 132. Grimme, S., Ehrlich, S., Goerigk, L., 2011. E ff ect of the damp-ing function in dispersion corrected density functional the-ory. Journal of computational chemistry 32, 1456–1465. Hausen, H., 1959. Neue gleichungen fur die warmeubertragung bei freier oder erzwungener stromung. Allg. Waermetech 9, 75–79. He, S., Wei, L., Lu, J., Wang, W., 2022. Heat transfer charac-teristics of molten salt flowing in steam generator. Thermal Science 26, 1757–1769. Hess, B., 2002. Determining the shear viscosity of model liq-uids from molecular dynamics simulations. The Journal of Chemical Physics 116, 209–217. Ignatiev, V., Feynberg, O., Gnidoi, I., Merzlyakov, A., Surenkov, A., Uglov, V., Zagnitko, A., Subbotin, V., San-nikov, I., Toropov, A., et al., 2014. Molten salt actinide recy-cler and transforming system without and with th–u support: Fuel cycle flexibility and key material properties. Annals of Nuclear Energy 64, 408–420. Kesler, K., Dokutovich, V., 2025. Radiative contribution to thermal conductivity for flinak–cef3 molten mixtures used as an example. Russian Metallurgy (Metally) 2025, 247–251. Kresse, G., Joubert, D., 1999. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758–1775. Kubo, R., 1957. Statistical-mechanical theory of irreversible processes. i. general theory and simple applications to mag-netic and conduction problems. Journal of the Physical So-ciety of Japan 12, 570–586. 16 LeBlanc, D., 2010. Molten salt reactors: A new beginning for an old idea. Nuclear Engineering and design 240, 1644– 1656. Lee, S.C., Zhai, Y., Li, Z., Walter, N.P., Rose, M., Heuser, B.J., 2021. Comparative studies of the structural and transport properties of molten salt flinak using the machine-learned neural network and reparametrized classical forcefields. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 125, 10562–10570. Li, X., Jiang, Y., Wang, Y., Cui, S., Gong, Y., 2025. Chem-ical footprints of thorium and uranium in molten lif–bef2 explored by first-principles molecular dynamics simulations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 129, 1583–1590. Li, X., Xu, T., Gong, Y., 2024. Compositional transferability of deep potential in molten lif–bef 2 and laf 3 mixtures: pre-diction of density, viscosity, and local structure. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 26, 12044–12052. Maginn, E., Messerly, R., Carlson, D., Roe, D., Elliott, J., 2018. Best practices for computing transport properties 1. self-di ff usivity and viscosity from equilibrium molecular dynam-ics [article v1.0]. Living Journal of Computational Molecular Science 1. Mei, L., Cai, X., Jiang, D., Chen, J., Zhu, Y., Liu, Y., Wang, X., 2013. The investigation of thermal neutron scattering data for molten salt flibe. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology 50, 682–688. Müller-Plathe, F., 1997. A simple nonequilibrium molecular dynamics method for calculating the thermal conductivity. The Journal of Chemical Physics 106, 6082–6085. Nose, S., 2002. A molecular dynamics method for simulations in the canonical ensemble. Molecular Physics 100, 191–198. Novikov, I.S., Gubaev, K., Podryabinkin, E.V., Shapeev, A.V., 2020. The mlip package: moment tensor potentials with mpi and active learning. Machine Learning: Science and Tech-nology 2, 025002. Pan, G., Ding, J., Chen, P., Yan, H., Du, Y., Lee, D.J., Lu, Y., 2021. Finite-size e ff ects on thermal property predictions of molten salts. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 221, 110884. Pan, H.P., Li, G.Y., Zhang, L., Tan, X.L., Bo, T., 2026. Machine learning-accelerated molecular dynamics simulations of puf3 in lif-naf-kf: Unraveling coordination chemistry and ionic transport mechanisms. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B .Perdew, J.P., Burke, K., Ernzerhof, M., 1996. Generalized gra-dient approximation made simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865– 3868. Petukhov, B., Kirillov, V., 1958 (in Russian). To the question of heat transfer in turbulent pipe flow of liquids in tubes. Teploenergetika 4, 63–68. Podryabinkin, E., Garifullin, K., Shapeev, A., Novikov, I., 2023. Mlip-3: Active learning on atomic environments with moment tensor potentials. The Journal of Chemical Physics 159, 084112. Podryabinkin, E.V., Shapeev, A.V., 2017. Active learning of linearly parametrized interatomic potentials. Computational Materials Science 140, 171–180. Polovinkin, M., Rybin, N., Maksimov, D., Valiev, F., Khu-dorozhkova, A., Laptev, M., Rudenko, A., Shapeev, A., 2026. Machine-learned interatomic potentials for predicting physicochemical properties of molten metal–salt systems for calcium electrolysis. Electrochimica Acta , 149377. Porter, T., Vaka, M.M., Steenblik, P., Della Corte, D., 2022. Computational methods to simulate molten salt thermophys-ical properties. Communications Chemistry 5, 69. Qiu, Y., Li, M.J., Li, M.J., Zhang, H.H., Ning, B., 2019. Nu-merical and experimental study on heat transfer and flow fea-tures of representative molten salts for energy applications in turbulent tube flow. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 135, 732–745. Redkin, A., Khudorozhkova, A., Il’ina, E., Pershina, S., Mush-nikov, P., Isakov, A., Zaikov, Y., Kataev, A., Laptev, M., 2021. Density and heat capacity of some molten mixtures in system lif-bef2-uf4. Journal of Molecular Liquids 341, 117215. Reis, J., Seo, J., Hassan, Y., 2024. Consequences of molten salt solidification in a natural circulation flow visualization loop due to heater failure. Nuclear Engineering and Design 424, 113278. Rodriguez, A., Lam, S., Hu, M., 2021. Thermodynamic and transport properties of lif and flibe molten salts with deep learning potentials. ACS applied materials & interfaces 13, 55367–55379. Rohrbach, A., Hafner, J., Kresse, G., 2003. Electronic correla-tion e ff ects in transition-metal sulfides. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 15, 979–996. Rollet, A.L., Sarou-Kanian, V., Bessada, C., 2009. Measur-ing self-di ff usion coe ffi cients up to 1500 k: A powerful tool to investigate the dynamics and the local structure of inor-ganic melts. Inorganic Chemistry 48, 10972–10975. PMID: 19863113. Romatoski, R.R., Hu, L.W., 2017. Fluoride salt coolant prop-erties for nuclear reactor applications: A review. Annals of Nuclear Energy 109, 635–647. Rudenko, A., Kataev, A., Tkacheva, O., 2022. Dynamic viscos-ity of the naf-kf-ndf3 molten system. Materials 15, 4884. Rudenko, A., Redkin, A., Khudorozhkova, A., Il’ina, E., Per-shina, S., Laptev, M., Vlasov, M., Zaikov, Y., 2024. Den-sity and thermal conductivity of some molten mixtures in 17 flinak–ndf3 system. International Journal of Thermophysics 45, 135. Rybin, N., Maksimov, D., Zaikov, Y., Shapeev, A., 2024. Ther-mophysical properties of molten flinak: A moment tensor po-tential approach. Journal of Molecular Liquids 410, 125402. Serrano-López, R., Fradera, J., Cuesta-López, S., 2013. Molten salts database for energy applications. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification 73, 87–102. Shapeev, A.V., 2016. Moment tensor potentials: A class of systematically improvable interatomic potentials. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 14, 1153–1173. Shen, C., Attarian, S., Zhang, Y., Zhang, H., Asta, M., Szl-ufarska, I., Morgan, D., 2025. Supersalt: equivariant neural network force fields for multicomponent molten salts system. Nature Communications 16, 7280. Sieder, E.N., Tate, G.E., 1936. Heat transfer and pressure drop of liquids in tubes. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 28, 1429–1435. Srivastava, A., Vaidya, A., Maheshwari, N., Vijayan, P., 2013. Heat transfer and pressure drop characteristics of molten flu-oride salt in circular pipe. Applied thermal engineering 61, 198–205. Tkacheva, O.Y., 2024. Current state of research on the vis-cosity of molten fluorides. Electrochemical Materials and Technologies. 2024. Vol. 3. № 1 3. Tkacheva, O.Y., Rudenko, A., Kataev, A., Mushnikov, P., Kholkina, A., Zaikov, Y.P., 2022. The viscosity of molten salts based on the lif–bef2 system. Russian Journal of Non-Ferrous Metals 63, 276–283. Vidrio, R., Mastromarino, S., Still, E., Chapdelaine, L., Scar-lat, R.O., 2022. Density and thermal expansivity of molten 2lif-bef2 (flibe): measurements and uncertainty quantifica-tion. Journal of Chemical & Engineering Data 67, 3517– 3531. Williams, D.F., 2006. Assessment of candidate molten salt coolants for the advanced high temperature reactor (AHTR). Technical Report ORNL /TM-2006 /12. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Yang, H., Gallagher, R., Chartrand, P., Gheribi, A.E., 2023. De-velopment of a molten salt thermal conductivity model and database for advanced energy systems. Solar Energy 256, 158–178. Zakiryanov, D.O., 2024. Structure and properties of the flinak– laf 3 melt obtained with neural network potential. Electro-chemical Materials and Technologies 3, 20243032. 18 Appendix A. Finite-element model: governing equations, material properties, and boundary conditions 

This section collects, in one place, the governing equations, the material properties, and the boundary conditions used in the FE simulations. It is the supporting information for Section 2 of the main text. The numerical implementation (mesh strategy, turbulence model, and solver settings) is described in the next sections. 

Governing equations 

The steady-state FE problem couples mass conservation, momentum conservation (Navier–Stokes), energy conservation (with Joule heating), and the electric current conservation equation. The numerical model was developed in COMSOL Multiphysics using a coupled multiphysics approach. The simulation com-bined the Fluid flow Module (Turbulent Flow, k−ϵ model), Heat Transfer Module, AC /DC Module, and the predefined multiphysics interfaces Electromagnetic Heating and Non-Isothermal Flow. The steady-state current-conservation equation is: 

∇ · J = 0, (A.1) where J is the current density vector (A /m2). The steady-state mass-conservation (continuity) equation is: 

∇ · (ρ u) = 0, (A.2) where u is the velocity vector (m /s) and ρ is the salt density (kg /m3). The fluid flow was modeled as incompressible turbulent flow by solving the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equa-tions together with the k − ϵ turbulence model: 

ρ (u · ∇ )u = −∇ p + ∇ · h(μ+ μt

(∇u + ∇uTi , (A.3) where ( u) is the velocity vector, (p) is the pressure, ( ρ) is the density, ( μ) is the dynamic viscosity, and ( μt) is the turbulent viscosity determined from the transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy (k) and the specific dissipation rate ( ϵ). For the laminar-flow regimes (Re < 2300), the system reduces to the steady incompressible Navier–Stokes equations with no turbulence model. The steady-state energy-conservation equation with Joule heating is: 

ρCp (u · ∇ )T = ∇ · [k ∇T ] + QJ , (A.4) where Cp is the isobaric heat capacity of the salt (J /(kg·K)), k is the thermal conductivity (W /(m·K)), and QJ is the volumetric Joule-heat source (W /m3). 

Material properties 

The equations of the thermophysical problem are solved in the domains of the molten salt, the steel heat-exchanger wall, and the kaolin-wool insulation. The solid materials for current supply (AISI 321) and insulation (50Al 2O3–50SiO 2) are taken from the COMSOL material library at the relevant temperatures, properties for AISI 316L pipeline are given in TableB.8, B.9. The temperature-dependent salt properties for FE-ref -model (validation model) are given in Table B.7. The temperature-dependent salt properties for FE-MTP -model (coolant with MTP-MD calculated properties) are given in Section 3.1 the main text. 

Boundary and operating conditions 

The boundary conditions applied in the FE simulations are summarised below. 

Melt inlet (right end of the working section).. A uniform velocity profile corresponding to the experimental mass flow rate Q0

(Table 3 of the main text) is imposed, together with the experimental inlet temperature Tin . The direction of the velocity is normal to the inlet cross-section. 

Melt outlet (left end of the working section). An open-boundary condition (constant static pressure) is applied at the outlet. The thermodynamic state at the outlet is the Open-Boundary condition. 

No-slip condition on the inner wall of the steel pipe. Applied in both laminar and turbulent regimes on the inner wall of the steel pipe. 19 Electrical boundary conditions. Prescribed voltage drop Vo at the two end current supplies, electric ground V = 0 at the central current supply, and electrical insulation on all external surfaces. The prescribed voltage drop Vo and the mass flow rate Qo for each of the six investigated regimes are given in Table 3 of the main text. 

External surfaces of the insulation. Convective heat-flux boundary condition (Eq. (2) of the main text) with Tamb = 300 K. The natural-convection coe ffi cient α on the outer surface is taken from standard correlations for the orientation of the insulation (hori-zontal cylinder); the exact value is reported in the COMSOL setup. The 250 W heat-loss calibration is enforced via an Open Boundary condition at a specified outlet temperature Tupstr = T( Rtherm ), 

Rtherm is the average thermal resistance of the experimental setup) The average value of the thermal resistance over all experimental regimes is 0.0051 K /W, the Tupstr defined as follows: 

Tupstr = Tin + DQloss ,exp 

E · DRtherm ,exp 

E , (A.5) The values of the functional dependence (A.5) are determined by the design of the test facility and do not depend on the flow regime. 

Mesh strategy and y + criterion 

A predominantly structured mesh with local refinement was applied in regions of high velocity gradients and near-wall flow. The standard k˘ϵ turbulence model with wall functions was used; therefore, the mesh was designed to meet the wall treatment requirements, targeting 30 < y+ < 300 on most wall surfaces to ensure accurate and computationally e ffi cient boundary layer modeling. The thickness of the first layer y = 10 −4 m. 

Solver settings 

The coupled Joule–thermal–flow problem is iterated to convergence with a relative residual criterion of 10 −3 on all fields. The simulations are steady-state, so no time stepping is involved. The linear system is solved with the COMSOL Multiphysics linear iterative segregated solver. The damping factors are 1 for electric field, 0.5 for velocity and pressure, 0.5 for temperature, 0.35 for turbulence variable. 20 Appendix B. FLiBe-coolant properties used in processing experimental data and developing a validation model FE-ref .  

> Table B.7: Temperature-dependent thermophysical properties of base FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %) for FE-ref model.

Property Units f(T) T, K Data source 

Thermal conductivity ( k) W/(m ·K) 0.00065 T + 0.45 890–1023 Bobrova et al. (2023) Density ( ρ) g/m3 (2 .39 − 0.00047 T ) 890–1023 Redkin et al. (2021) Viscosity ( η) Pa ·s −2.44 × 10 −10 T 3 + 2.44 × 10 −7T 2

−2.44 × 10 −4T + 0.32 890–1023 Tkacheva (2024) Electrical conductivity ( σ) S/m 1exp  2.36 × 10 3/T − 8.101  750–950 Edwards et al. (1952) 

> Table B.8: Temperature-dependent thermal conductivity of AISI 316L pipeline.

T , K k, W /(m ·K) 

500 16.61 600 18.32 700 19.98 800 21.63 900 23.21 1000 24.68 1100 26.17 1200 27.53 1300 28.96 

> Table B.9: Temperature-dependent electrical conductivity of AISI 316L pipeline.

T , K σ · 10 −6, S /m

293 1.41 373 1.21 473 1.052 673 0.85 873 0.73 1073 0.55 21 Appendix C. Errors of MTP for FLiBe-UF 4 and FLiBe-LaF 3 systems 

The correlation plots for energies and forces acting on atoms on the training set are reported in Fig. C.13. For the FLiBe-UF 4

and FLiBe-LaF 3 systems we have 1088 and 948 atomic configurations in training set, respectively. The errors in form of root mean sqaure error (RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) are reported on plots. 

> Figure C.13: Errors of MTP on the training set. (a) Energies for FLiBe-UF 4, (b) forces acting on atoms for FLiBe-UF 4, (c) energies for FLiBe-LaF 3, (d) forces acting on atoms for FLiBe-LaF 3.

22 Appendix D. Viscosity calculations autocorrelation functions 

In Fig. D.14 we represent the convergence of viscosity with respect to the stress-stress autocorrelation function. We observe that by 15 ps the value of viscosity is converged. For the higher temperatures the convergence is reached earlier. 

> Figure D.14: Stress-stress autocorrelation function integrals for the FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % with 5 mol % of UF 4, obtained at temperature of 973 K (a) and 1273 K (b).

23 Appendix E. Specific heat capacity of FLiBe-UF 4 and FLiBe-LaF 3

The specific heat capacity at constant pressure (C p) is obtained from the temperature dependence of the total enthalpy over the range from 873 to 1073 K. In Fig. E.15 we report the C p calculated with the MTP-MD. We observe the decrease of C p with addition of LaF 3 and UF 4. The C p for the pure FLiBe 66 mol % – 34 mol % is in agreement with the experimental study Redkin et al. (2021). 

> Figure E.15: Composition dependence of the mass-specific heat capacity of molten salts, obtained with MTP-MD. Experimental data for pure FLiBe is taken from Redkin (2021) Redkin et al. (2021).

24 Appendix F. Di ff usion coe ffi cients of FLiBe 74 mol % – 26 mol % with UF 4 and LaF 3

The di ff usion coe ffi cients of species in FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %) show the similar behavior to one discussed for the FLiBe (66 mol % – 34 mol %) in the main text.   

> Figure F.16: Di ff usion coe ffi cients of species in FLiBe (74 mol % – 26 mol %) with 4 mol % additions of UF 4(a) and LaF 3(b).

25