Title: 2607.11712v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11712v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 02:27:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
CatRetriever:  Contrastive  Representation  Learning 

# for  Slab -to -Bulk  Retrieval  in  Generative  Catalyst 

# Discovery 

Jungho  Oh 1,† , Woosung  Kim 2,† , Dong  Hyeon  Mok  3, Jonggeol  Na 4,5,6*  and  Seoin  Back 1,6,7,8* 

AUTHOR  ADDRESS 

> 1

KU -KIST  Graduate  School  of  Converging  Science  and  Technology,  Korea  University,  Seoul 

02841,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 2

Department  of  Materials  Science  and  Engineering,  Korea  University,  Seoul  02841,  Republic 

of  Korea 

> 3

Department  of  Chemical  and  Biomolecular  Engineering,  Sogang  University,  Seoul  04107, 

Republic  of  Korea 

> 4

Department  of  Chemical  Engineering  and  Materials  Science,  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul 

03760,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 5

Department  of  Chemical  Engineering,  Graduate  Program  in  System  Health  Science  and 

Engineering,  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul,  03760,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 6

Institute  for  Multiscale  Matter  and  Systems  (IMMS),  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul  03760, 

Republic  of  Korea 

> 7

Department  of  Integrative  Energy  Engineering,  Korea  University,  Seoul  02841,  Republic  of 

Korea 

> 8

Center  for  Hydrogen  and  Fuel  Cells,  Korea  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology(KIST),  Seoul 

02792,  Republic  of  Korea 

> †

These  authors  contributed  equally  to  this  work. 

> *

Corresponding  authors:  sback@korea.ac.kr  (SB),  jgna@ewha.ac.kr  (JN) KEYWORDS 

Slab -to -bulk  retrieval,  Contrastive  learning,  Adsorption  energy -based  screening,  Catalyst 

discovery ABSTRACT 

Inverse  design  is  an  emerging  data -driven  paradigm  for  efficiently  navigating  vast  chemical 

spaces  to  discover  new  materials  with  targeted  properties,  and  in  the  context  of  heterogeneous 

catalysis,  surface  generative  models  have  recently  advanced  this  goal  by  directly  generating 

catalyst  surface -adsorbate  structures.  However,  these  models  typically  operate  at  the  slab  level 

and  do  not  provide  the  corresponding  parent  bulk  structure,  making  it  difficult  to  assess  bulk -

dependent  properties  such  as  formation  energy,  surface  energy,  crystallographic  symmetry,  and 

synthesizability.  Here,  we  address  this  missing  slab -to -bulk  connection  as  a retrieval  problem 

and  introduce  CatRetriever,  a contrastive  representation  learning  model  that  aligns  slab  and 

bulk  crystal  representations  in  a shared  latent  space.  From  a slab  query,  CatRetriever  accurately 

retrieves  plausible  parent  bulk  candidates  with  R@1  > 91%  and  R@3  > 98%  on  both  the  in -

distribution  and  holdout  evaluation  sets.  We  further  extend  the  CatRetriever  framework  into  an 

adsorption  energy  targeted  bulk  discovery  pipeline  that  combines  bulk  retrieval,  generative 

search  space  expansion,  and  adsorption  energy  distribution  analysis.  This  workflow  evaluates 

candidates  by  both  structural  compatibility  with  the  query  slab  and  their  ability  to  access  the 

target  adsorption  energy  range  across  diverse  surface  environments.  CatRetriever  therefore 

provides  a scalable  route  for  connecting  catalyst  generative  models  with  physically  plausible 

and  adsorption  energy  compatible  bulk  catalyst  discovery. 1.  Introduction 

Discovering  highly  active  catalysts  is  a central  goal  in  enhancing  the  efficiency  of 

energy  conversion  processes 1-3. Traditionally,  these  efforts  have  relied  on  experimental  trial -

and -error  and  density  functional  theory  (DFT) -based  high -throughput  screening,  which  remain 

time -consuming  and  computationally  expensive,  limiting  the  breadth  of  the  explorable 

chemical  space . Moreover,  conventional  screening  is  inherently  constrained  by  predefined 

databases  or  enumerated  candidate  spaces,  and  its  scalability  decreases  rapidly  as  the  chemical 

and  configurational  complexity  of  catalyst  structures  increases 4,  5. These  challenges  have 

motivated  a shift  from  database -bound  forward  screening  toward  inverse  design  strategies. 

Artificial  intelligence  (AI)  has  emerged  as  a powerful  alternative,  particularly  through 

generative  models  capable  of  proposing  novel  crystal  structures  beyond  those  catalogued  in 

existing  databases 6-8.

This  generative  paradigm  has  recently  been  extended  to  heterogeneous  catalytic 

surfaces 9,10 . Since  catalytic  reactions  occur  at  surfaces  rather  than  in  the  bulk,  catalyst 

generative  models  must  account  for  both  surface  geometry  and  adsorbate  configurations.  The 

direct  generation  of  slab -adsorbate  structures  was  pioneered  by  CatGPT,  a generative 

pretrained  transformer  for  heterogeneous  catalysts 9. Subsequent  diffusion -based  frameworks 

have  advanced  adsorbate  placement  and  surface -structure  generation 11,  12 , while  recent  flow -

matching  approaches  have  enabled  the  direct  co -generation  of  slab -adsorbate  systems 13 . Most 

recently,  conditional  generation  strategies  have  enabled  the  generation  of  catalyst  structures 

guided  by  categorical  or  continuous  target  properties 14 . Despite  these  advances,  a fundamental 

limitation  persists.  Existing  surface  generative  models  operate  at  the  slab  level  and  provide  no 

explicit  information  about  the  parent  bulk  structure  from  which  a surface  is  derived 9,  14 . This 

gap  represents  a critical  bottleneck  in  practical  catalyst  design  because  essential  material 

descriptors  such  as  formation  energy,  surface  energy,  crystallographic  symmetry,  and  space 

group,  are  defined  with  respect  to  the  bulk 15,  16 . Without  knowledge  of  the  parent  bulk,  the 

thermodynamic  plausibility,  phase  stability,  and  metastability  of  a generated  surface  structure 

cannot  be  rigorously  evaluated 14,  17 . This  challenge  has  been  noted  in  recent  literature,  yet  it 

remains  largely  unresolved  and  continues  to  hinder  the  deployment  of  generative  models  in 

real -world  catalyst  discovery  workflows. 

We  define  this  missing  connection  as  the  slab -to -bulk  retrieval  problem:  inferring 

plausible  parent  bulk  structures  from  a given  slab.  This  task  differs  from  conventional  bulk -to -slab  enumeration  or  database  lookup,  because  conditionally  generated  slabs  are  not  guaranteed 

to  exactly  match  any  pre -enumerated  surface.  Although  direct  structural  comparison  against  a

slab  database  is  possible,  it  becomes  inefficient  for  repeated  post -generation  screening  because 

each  query  must  be  compared  against  a large  pool  of  candidate  surfaces.  A learned  retrieval 

formulation  provides  a scalable  alternative  by  embedding  slabs  and  bulks  in  a shared 

representation  space  and  ranking  candidate  bulks  th rough  fast  similarity  search.  This 

formulation  also  accommodates  the  non -unique  nature  of  slab -to -bulk  inference,  where  a local 

surface  motif  may  be  compatible  with  multiple  chemically  or  structurally  similar  bulk 

structures,  and  it  can  be  used  as  a modula r post -generation  bridge  for  existing  surface 

generative  models. 

To  address  this  problem,  we  propose  CatRetriever,  a contrastive  representation 

learning  model 18,  19  that  captures  the  structural  and  chemical  correspondence  between  bulk 

crystals  and  catalytic  surfaces . CatRetriever  achieves  approximately  92%  top -1 retrieval 

accuracy  on  the  Materials  Project  dataset.  However,  retrieval  from  a fixed  database  is 

inherently  limited  by  the  database  itself.  We  therefore  develop  a two -stage  search  strategy  that 

augments  database  retrieval  with  a crystal  structure  generati ve  model 8, enabling  exploration  of 

bulk  candidates  beyond  the  Materials  Project  database.  Building  on  CatRetriever,  we  construct 

an  end -to -end  catalyst  discovery  pipeline  that  integrates  conditional  catalyst  surface 

generation 14 , slab -to -bulk  retrieval,  and  bulk -to -surface  enumeration 20  and  machine  learning 

force  field -based  adsorption  energy  evaluation 21 , establishing  a physically  grounded  and 

scalable  workflow  for  practical  catalyst  discovery. 

2.  Results  and  Discussions 

We  formulate  the  slab -to -bulk  matching  problem  as  a cross -domain  retrieval  task  in  a

shared  embedding  space 19 . In  CatRetriever,  bulk  crystals  and  catalyst  surfaces  are 

independently  encoded  and  projected  into  a common  representation  space 18 , where  their 

compatibility  is  evaluated  through  embedding  similarity.  The  shared  space  is  learned 

contrastively  by  bringing  matched  slab -bulk  pairs  closer  together  while  separating  unmatched 

pairs.  Rather  than  treating  parent -bulk  identification  as  a conv entional  single -label 

classification  problem,  CatRetriever  returns  a ranked  list  of  plausible  bulk  candidates.  This retrieval  formulation  reflects  the  inherent  non -unique  nature  of  slab -to -bulk  inference,  as  a

given  surface  may  be  compatible  with  multiple  bulk  structures  exhibiting  similar  local 

chemical  and  structural  environments. 

Figure  1.  Schematic  illustration  of  CatRetriever  for  contrastive  slab -to -bulk  retrieval.  (a) 

Definition  of  positive  and  negative  pairs  for  contrastive  learning.  (b)  UMA -based  embedding 

extraction  and  projection  of  slab  and  bulk  structures  into  latent  representation s,  Zs and  Zb. (c) 

Contrastive  learning  aligns  each  query  slab  with  its  true  parent  bulk  while  separating  negative 

bulk  candidates,  enabling  similarity -based  parent  bulk  retrieval. 

Construction  of  Bulk  and  Slab  Database 

In  this  work,  a bulk  candidate  database  was  constructed  to  define  the  retrieval  search 

space  corresponding  to  a given  slab  query.  The  bulk  candidate  set  was  derived  from  the Materials  Project  database 15 . Following  the  compositional  space  and  stability  criteria  of  the 

Open  Catalyst  2020  (OC20)  bulk  dataset,  binary  and  ternary  bulk  structures  with  formation 

energies  below  0 eV/atom  and  energy  above  the  hull  (E hull ) values  below  0.1  eV/atom  were 

selected 20 , resulting  in  a total  of  38,901  bulk  candidates. 

Surface  slabs  were  then  generated  from  these  bulks  for  low -index  Miller  surfaces  using 

the  "Slab.from_bulk_get_specific_millers()"  implementation  in  the  FAIRChem /Open  Catalyst 

Project  slab  generation  workflow 20 . This  procedure  follows  established  slab -construction 

methods 22 , and  enumerates  possible  surface  terminations  for  each  Miller  index,  allowing 

multiple  slab  configurations  to  be  considered  for  a single  parent  bulk.  Through  this  process,  a

slab  database  of  1,384,140  structures  was  established  for  both  retrieval  training  and  evaluation. 

Detailed  slab -generation  procedures  are  provided  in  Supplementary  Note  S1 .

Learning  a Joint  Slab -Bulk  Representation  with  CatRetriever 

To  represent  both  bulk  and  slab  structures  within  a shared  representation  space, 

structural  embeddings  were  extracted  using  the  pretrained  atomic  foundation  potential, 

Universal  Model  for  Atoms  (UMA;  uma -s-1p1) 21 . Each  bulk  and  slab  structure  was  provided 

as  input  to  the  model,  and  the  UMA  backbone  representations  were  pooled  to  obtain  fixed -

length,  structure -level  embeddings.  The  resulting  bulk  and  slab  embeddings  were  then  used  as 

input  features  for  CatRetriever , the  proposed  bulk –slab  contrastive  retrieval  model. 

Before  training,  the  bulk –slab  dataset  was  split  into  model -development  and  holdout 

subsets.  Specifically,  20%  of  the  bulk  structures  were  first  assigned  to  the  holdout  set,  and  all 

slabs  generated  from  these  bulk  structures  were  excluded  from  training  and  validation.  The 

remaining  80%  of  the  bulk  structures  were  used  for  model  development,  where  the 

corresponding  slabs  were  randomly  divided  into  training,  validation,  and  in -distribution  test 

sets  in  a ratio  of  0.64:0.16:0.20.  The  resulting  in -distribution  and  holdout  test  sets  were  used 

for  the  retrieval  performance  evaluation  described  in  the  next  section. 

To  learn  the  correspondence  between  slab  queries  and  their  parent  bulk  structures, 

CatRetriever  was  trained  using  a contrastive  learning  formulation 18,  23 . For  each  query,  the  pair 

with  the  true  bulk  was  defined  as  a positive  pair,  while  negatives  were  formed  implicitly  using the  rest  of  the  full  candidate  bulk  pool,  without  requiring  explicit  negative  labels  (Figure  1a ). 

Both  bulk  and  slab  embeddings  were  passed  through  separate  projection  heads  and  mapped 

into  a shared  latent  space.  The  resulting  latent  representations  of  a slab  𝑠  and  a candidate  bulk  

> 𝑏

are  denoted  as  𝑍 𝑠  and  𝑍 𝑏 , respectively  (Figure  1b ).  The  retrieval  score  was  defined  as    

> 𝑟 (𝑠 ,𝑏 )=𝑍 𝑠
> T𝑍 𝑏

which  is  equivalent  to  cosine  similarity  because  both  representations  were  L2 -normalized.  The 

projection  heads  were  trained  with  a frozen  pretrained  backbone  of  UMA,  optimizing  the 

alignment  between  bulk  and  slab  representations  such  that  a query  slab  retr ieves  its 

corresponding  parent  bulk  with  high  retrieval  score  (Figure  1c ).  Details  of  the  UMA 

embedding  extraction  procedure,  scalar -channel  pooling  (l  = 0),  projection -head  architecture 

of  CatRetriever , contrastive  training,  validation,  and  model  selection  are  provided  in 

Supplementary  Note  S2 .

Parent -Bulk  Retrieval  Performance 

Figure  2. Parent -bulk  retrieval  performance  and  similarity  score  distribution  of  CatRetriever. 

(a)  Retrieval  performance  on  the  in -distribution  and  holdout  test  sets,  evaluated  using  recall 

at  rank  1 (R@1)  and  rank  3 (R@3).  (b)  Distributions  of  similarity  scores  for  the  holdout  test 

set.  For  visual  clarity,  the  spos  and  sneg  density  distributions  were  independently  rescaled  (c) 

Distributions  of  the  similarity  margin  for  correct  and  incorrect  top -1 retrievals. 

We  first  evaluated  how  accurately  CatRetriever  retrieves  the  corresponding  parent  bulk from  a given  slab  query.  Figure  2a  summarizes  the  parent -bulk  retrieval  performance  in  terms 

of  Recall@1  (R@1)  and  Recall @3  (R@3).  Here,  R@1  denotes  the  fraction  of  queries  for 

which  the  parent  bulk  is  ranked  at  the  top  position,  while  R@3  measures  the  fraction  of  queries 

for  which  the  parent  bulk  appears  within  the  top  three  candidates.  To  assess  generalization, 

the  evaluation  was  conducted  on  two  distinct  sets:  an  in -distribution  set  and  a holdout  set.  The 

in -distribution  set  consists  of  unseen  slab  queries  derived  from  bulk  structures  represented  in 

the  training  set,  enabling  evaluation  of  generalization  to  new  slabs  from  seen  bulks.  In  contrast, 

the  holdout  set  comprises  slab  queries  from  bulk  structures  that  are  entirely  excluded  from 

training,  enabling  evaluation  of  generalization  to  unseen  bulk  structures. 

The  model  achieves  strong  retrieval  performance  on  both  sets.  On  the  in -distribution 

set,  it  attains  R@1  = 91.9%  and  R@3  = 98.8%,  while  on  the  holdout  set,  it  maintains  similarly 

high  performance  with  R@1  = 91.5%  and  R@3  = 98.9%.  These  results  indicate  tha t

CatRetriever  does  not  merely  memorize  slab -bulk  correspondences  observed  during  training, 

but  generalizes  effectively  to  slab  queries  derived  from  previously  unseen  bulk  structures, 

demonstrating  robust  out -of -distribution  generalization.  We  note  that  the  objective  of  this  work 

is  not  a strict  top -1 identification,  but  reliable  shortlisting  of  a small  number  of  plausible  bulk 

candidates  for  subsequent  adsorption  energy  evaluation.  From  this  perspective,  the  consistently 

high  R@3  (≥  98%)  is  particularly  noteworthy,  as  it  ensures  that  the  correct  paren t bulk  is 

included  within  a small  candidate  set  with  high  probability. 

We  then  examined  whether  CatRetriever  successfully  learned  a shared  representation 

space  that  distinguishes  matched  slab -bulk  pairs  from  non -matching  candidates.  For  each  query 

slab,  the  similarity  to  its  annotated  parent  bulk  was  defined  as  the  positive  score,  spos , while 

similarities  to  non -matching  bulk  candidates  were  treated  as  negative  scores,  sneg . Figure  2b 

shows  the  corresponding  score  distributions  for  the  holdout  test  set.  The  spos  distribution  is 

markedly  shifted  toward  higher  values  than  the  sneg  distribution.  This  clear  separation 

demonstrates  that  the  learned  embedding  space  effectively  distinguishes  true  slab –bulk 

correspondences  from  unrelated  candidates.  Some  non -matching  bulk  structures  may  share 

similar  local  coordination  environments,  compo sitions,  or  structural  motifs  with  the  query  slab 

and  may  therefore  receive  relatively  high  similarity  scores.  Nevertheless,  the  strong  overall 

separation  indicates  that  the  learned  similarity  provides  a meaningful  basis  for  ranking 

plausible  parent -bulk  candidates. To  further  characterize  retrieval  failures,  we  defined  the  similarity  margin  as  Δs = spos 

− sneg,  max , where  sneg,  max  is  the  highest  similarity  among  all  non -matching  bulk  candidates. 

Positive  margins  indicate  that  the  annotated  parent  bulk  is  ranked  above  every  negative 

candidate,  whereas  negative  margins  indicate  that  at  least  one  incorrect  candidate  receives  a

higher  similarity  score.  As  shown  in  Figure  2c , correct  retrievals  exhibit  broadly  distributed 

positive  margins,  while  incorrect  retrievals  are  concentrated  close  to  zero  on  the  negative  side. 

This  indicates  that  most  retrieval  failures  occur  when  the  annotated  parent  bulk  and  the 

strongest  competing  candidate  receive  very  similar  scores,  rather  than  when  an  unrelated  bulk 

is  ranked  substantially  higher.  Such  low -margin  failures  likely  arise  from  ambiguous  regions 

of  the  embedding  space,  where  multiple  bulk  structures  share  similar  local  chemical  or 

st ructural  environments  for  the  query  slab.  Accordingly,  an  incorrect  parent -bulk  assignment 

under  a single -parent  annotation  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  retrieved  candidate  is 

chemically  implausible.  Instead,  it  may  reflect  the  presence  of  multiple  bulk  structures  that  are 

similarly  compatible  with  the  query  surface. 

Overall,  CatRetriever  demonstrates  strong  capability  in  recovering  relevant  bulk 

candidates  from  slab  queries,  particularly  in  placing  the  correct  bulk  within  a short  candidate 

list.  Collectively,  these  results  suggest  that  the  learned  representations  effe ctively  capture  the 

underlying  bulk -slab  correspondence  and  provide  an  effective  retrieval  basis  for  subsequent 

adsorption  energy -based  candidate  evaluation. 

Application  of  CatRetriever -Assisted  Bulk  Discovery  Framework 

To  demonstrate  the  practical  utility  of  the  CatRetriever -assisted  discovery  pipeline,  we 

applied  it  to  adsorption  energy -driven  catalyst  discovery  for  the  thermal  ammonia 

decomposition  reaction  (2NH 3 → N2 + 3H 2)24,  25 . The  overall  workflow  is  summarized  in 

Figure  3, where  target -conditioned  slab  generation,  CatRetriever -based  parent -bulk  retrieval, 

MatterGen -based  search -space  expansion,  and  adsorption  energy  validation  are  integrated  into 

a single  discovery  pipeline.  Here,  we  used  CatGPT , recently  extended  to  support  adsorbate  and 

adsorption  energy  conditioned  generation 14 . CatGPT  is  an  autoregressive  catalyst  generative 

model  that  represents  slab –adsorbate  structures  as  tokenized  sequences 9 and  generates  them 

under  prescribed  categorical  and  continuous  conditions 14 . In  this  application,  we  fixed  the adsorbate  identity  to  N*  and  imposed  the  N*  adsorption  energy  as  a continuous  target  condition 

of  −0.90  eV  to  generate  candidate  surface  motifs  relevant  to  the  thermal  ammonia 

decomposition 26 . Among  the  CatGPT -generated  10,000  N*  adsorbed  slab  structures,  581  slabs 

exhibited  UMA -calculated  N*  adsorption  energies  within  the  target  window  of  −1.00  to  −0.80 

eV  and  were  selected  as  query  structures  for  subsequent  parent -bulk  retrieval.  Details  for 

CatGPT -based  generation  and  screening  of  adsorption  structures  are  described  in 

Supplementary  Note  S3. 

Figure  3.  Overview  of  the  CatRetriever -Assisted  Bulk  Discovery  Framework.  Target -

conditioned  slab –adsorbate  structures  are  generated  using  CatGPT  and  used  as  queries  for 

CatRetriever -based  parent -bulk  retrieval.  When  MP  database  retrieval  is  unable  to  provide  bulk 

structures  with  high  retrieval  scores,  MatterGen  expands  the  candidate  space  with 

compositionally  and  structurally  diverse  bulk  structur es.  Adsorption  energies  on  surfaces 

generated  from  the  retrieved  candidates  are  then  evaluated  using  UMA,  and  promising  catalyst 

candidates  are  identified  based  on  the  portion  of  adsorption  energies  within  the  target  range. 

Each  selected  query  slab  was  used  as  input  to  CatRetriever  to  identify  parent  bulk 

structures  from  the  Materials  Project  database.  Among  the  581  target -window  query  slabs,  539 

had  at  least  one  available  MP  bulk  candidate  within  the  same  chemical  system,  wh ile  the 

remaining  42  had  no  matching  MP  entry.  We  applied  a retrieval  score  threshold  of  0.84,  above 

which  candidates  were  treated  as  structurally  plausible  parent  bulk  structures.  The  rationale  for 

this  threshold  selection  is  described  in  Supplementary  Note  S4 . Among  the  539  MP -matched 

cases,  158  exceeded  this  threshold  and  were  passed  to  the  adsorption  energy  validation  stage. 

For  the  remaining  381  MP -matched  cases  whose  best  MP  retrieval  scores  fell  below 

the  threshold,  as  well  as  the  42  cases  with  no  matching  MP  entry,  we  applied  MatterGen  to expand  the  search  space 8. The  generated  bulks  were  designed  to  share  the  same  chemical 

system  as  the  input  slab  and  were  incorporated  into  the  existing  bulk  candidate  pool.  Details  of 

the  MatterGen -based  generation  procedure  are  provided  in  Supplementary  Note  S5.1 .

Figure  4.  (a)  Representative  N*  adsorption  energy  distributions  obtained  from  bulk  candidates 

with  retrieval  scores  above  the  threshold.  Bulk  properties  of  representative  candidates  retrieved 

from  (b)  the  Materials  Project  database  and  generated  by  (c)  Mattergen,  respectively. 

Specifically,  64  additional  bulk  structures  were  generated  for  each  corresponding 

chemical  system,  and  these  generated  structures  were  then  embedded  and  re -ranked  using 

CatRetriever.  This  procedure  enabled  direct  comparison  between  the  best  MP  candidate  an d

the  best  MatterGen -generated  candidate  for  each  query  slab.  MatterGen  improved  upon  the 

best  MP  retrieval  score  in  249  out  of  381  cases  (65%),  and  70  of  these  generated  candidates 

exceeded  the  retrieval  score  threshold  of  0.84.  Representative  high -scoring  cases,  in  which  the 

best  MatterGen -generated  candidates  achieved  retr ieval  scores  above  0.90  after  re -ranking  with 

CatRetriever,  are  summarized  in  Table  S1  and  S2 . To  verify  that  this  improvement  did  not 

simply  originate  from  regenerating  structures  equivalent  to  the  MP -retrieved  top -1 candidates, 

we  further  performed  a StructureMatcher -based  redundancy  and  MP -overlap  analysis  of  the MatterGen -generated  candidates 27  (Supplementary  Note  S5.2 ).  The  MatterGen  and  MP  top -

1 overlap  was  low,  with  a mean  overlap  ratio  of  1.16%  and  a median  value  of  0%,  indicating 

that  the  generated  candidates  generally  expanded  the  search  space  beyond  the  existing  MP 

retrieval  result.  These  results  demonstrate  that  even  when  the  existing  MP  da tabase  does  not 

provide  a sufficiently  compatible  parent  bulk,  generative  search -space  expansion  can  recover 

plausible  bulk  candidates  that  are  more  structurally  consistent  with  the  query  slab  structures. 

Based  on  the  retrieval -score  analysis  presented  in  the  previous  section  and 

Supplementary  Note  S4 , a high  CatRetriever  score  indicates  strong  structural  compatibility 

between  the  generated  slab  and  a candidate  parent  bulk.  Such  structural  compatibility,  however, 

does  not  guarantee  that  the  bulk  exposes  surface  environments  with  the  desired  N*  adsorpti on 

strength 3,  26 . Therefore,  MP -derived  and  MatterGen -generated  candidates  with  retrieval  scores 

above  the  threshold  were  subjected  to  adsorption  energy  validation . For  each  candidate  bulk,  a

surface  corresponding  to  the  Miller  index  of  the  generated  query  slab  was  first  constructed 

using  the  slab  generation  utilities  in  the  FAIRChem /Open  Catalyst  Project.  Possible  N* 

adsorption  sites  were  systematically  enumerated,  and  structurally  equivalent  adsorption 

configurations  were  filtered  out  to  define  a representative  adsorption  set.  Adsorption  energies 

were  then  calculated  using  uma -s-1p1 . This  validation  can  be  completed  within  a relatively 

short  computational  time,  requiring  approximately  26  minutes  per  candidate  bulk  using  a single 

GPU  (Supplementary  Note  S6 ).

As  summarized  in  Figure  3a , bulk  candidates  with  retrieval  scores  above  the  threshold 

were  classified  into  four  representative  types  according  to  their  N*  adsorption  energy 

distributions  relative  to  the  target  window.  (i ) Promising  candidates  exhibited  a major 

adsorption  energy  density  region  overlapping  the  −1.00  to  −0.80  eV  target  window,  indicating 

that  the  retrieved  bulk  exposed  surface  sites  with  the  desired  N*  binding  strength.  (ii)  Strong 

binding  candidates  showed  distributions  shifted  toward  more  negative  adsorption  energies, 

suggesting  excessive  N*  stabilization.  (iii)  Weak  binding  candidates  showed  distributions 

shifted  toward  less  negative  adsorption  energies,  indicating  too  weak  N*  binding 3. (iv)  No 

overlap  candidates  exhibited  negligible  adsorption  site  density  within  the  target  window, 

without  a clear  shift  toward  either  strong  or  weak  binding.  This  distribution -based  classification 

provides  a functional  validation  layer  that  distinguishes  structurally  plausible  candidates  from 

catalytically  relevant  ones. Based  on  the  combined  retrieval  score  and  adsorption  energy  criteria,  target -

accessible  structures  were  selected  as  final  catalyst  candidates.  Figure  4b  and  4c  show 

representative  candidates  obtained  from  the  MP  database  and  MatterGen,  respectively,  namely 

an  MP -retrieved  NbS  and  a MatterGen -generated  Ca 3Cd.  The  corresponding  CatRetriever 

scores  and  query -orientation  N*  adsorption  energy  distributions  are  summarized  in 

Supplementary  Note  S7 , confirming  that  both  candidates  satisfied  the  retrieval  score  threshold 

and  exhibited  substantial  overlap  with  the  target  adsorption  energy  window. 

Importantly,  identifying  the  corresponding  bulk  structure  provides  two  distinct 

advantages  beyond  simply  assigning  a likely  parent  phase  to  the  query  slab.  First,  it  enables 

the  evaluation  of  bulk -dependent  thermodynamic  properties  that  cannot  be  inferred  from  the 

isolated  slab  alone.  Accordingly,  bulk -level  thermodynamic  properties  were  evaluated  using 

the  appropriate  source  for  each  candidate.  The  formation  energy  and  energy  above  hull  of  the 

MP -retrieved  NbS  candidate  were  obtained  from  the  Materials  Project  database,  whereas  those 

of  the  MatterGen -generated  Ca₃Cd  candidate  were  evaluated  by  DFT  calculations  and 

implemented  into  the  MP  database  to  calculate  formation  energies  and  the  energy  above  the 

hull  in  the  consistent  way  (Supplementary  Note  S8 ).  These  results  indicated  that  both 

candidates  are  thermodynamically  plausible,  with  NbS  located  on  the  convex  hull  and  Ca₃Cd 

exhibiting  a low  hull  energy  of  0.024  eV/atom.  Second,  the  identified  bulk  serves  as  a structural 

source  from  which  multiple  crystallographic  facets  and  adsorption  sites  can  be  enumerated, 

allowing  the  surface -dependent  distribution  of  N*  adsorption  energ ies  to  be  evaluated  beyond 

the  original  query -slab  orientation.  For  this  analysis,  five  low -index  Miller  indices  were  used. 

The  resulting  N*  adsorption  energy  distributions  across  enumerated  surfaces  are  presented  as 

histograms  in  Figure  4b  and  4c . Together,  these  analyses  demonstrate  that  CatRetriever 

enables  adsorption -optimized  slab  structures  to  be  connected  to  bulk  catalyst  candidates  whose 

thermodynamic  stability  and  surface -dependent  catalytic  behavior  can  subsequently  be 

assessed.  Detailed  pr ocedures  for  slab  construction,  adsorption  site  enumeration,  redundancy 

filtering,  and  adsorption  energy  evaluation  are  provided  in  Supplementary  Note  S9 .

Overall,  these  results  demonstrate  that  the  proposed  pipeline  can  systematically 

connect  catalyst  surface  structures  generated  by  generative  models  with  physically  plausible 

and  functionally  validated  bulk  structures.  CatRetriever  provides  rapid  parent  bul k retrieval  of 

candidate  bulk  structures  for  target -conditioned  slab  queries,  MatterGen  expands  the  chemical 

search  space  when  the  MP  database  is  insufficient,  and  adsorption  energy  distribution  analysis determines  whether  the  retrieved  or  generated  bulk  can  expose  surface  sites  with  the  desired 

N*  binding  strength.  Furthermore,  by  decoupling  structural  retrieval,  generative  search -space 

expansion,  and  adsorption  energy -based  validation,  the  workflow  provi des  a scalable  route  for 

practical  catalyst  discovery  beyond  catalyst  generative  model  alone. 

Nevertheless,  the  current  implementation  has  several  limitations  that  point  to 

directions  for  future  development.  First,  the  present  workflow  is  designed  as  a post -generation 

retrieval  and  validation  framework,  rather  than  a fully  joint  generator  of  bulk –slab  pairs. 

Accordingly,  bulk -level  properties  such  as  phase  stability,  synthesizability,  and  crystal 

symmetry  are  not  imposed  during  the  initial  catalyst  surface  generation  step.  Instead,  they  are 

evaluated  after  generated  slabs  are  connected  to  plausible  parent  bulk  candidates  through 

CatRetriever.  This  design  provides  modular  compatibility  with  existing  catalyst  generative 

models,  but  it  limits  direct  inverse  design  of  catalysts  under  explicit  bulk -property  constraints. 

Future  extensions  could  integrate  bulk -conditioned  catalyst  genera tion  or  joint  bulk –slab 

generation,  allowing  target  adsorption  properties  and  bulk -level  feasibility  criteria  to  be 

optimized  simultaneously.  Second,  CatRetriever  is  currently  trained  and  evaluated  within  the 

chemical  space  covered  by  the  Materials  Project  database.  Its  generalization  to  bulk  systems 

with  compositions  or  structural  motifs  entirely  absent  from  the  training  distribution  remains  an 

open  question.  Addr essing  this  limitation  will  require  either  broader  training  data  coverage  or 

retrieval  architectures  with  stronger  compositional  generalization. 

3.  Conclusions 

In  this  work,  we  developed  CatRetriever , a contrastive  slab -to -bulk  retrieval  model 

designed  to  bridge  the  gap  between  generated  catalytic  surfaces  and  their  plausible  parent  bulk 

structures.  By  mapping  slab  and  bulk  structures  into  a shared  representation  space, 

CatRetriever  enables  candidate  bulks  to  be  ranked  directly  from  slab  queries  without 

exhaustive  pairwise  structural  comparison.  The  model  achieved  strong  retrieval  performance 

on  both  in -distribution  and  holdout  evaluation  sets,  with  R@1  values  exceeding  91%  and  R@3 

values  approaching  99%,  demonstrating  robust  generalization  beyond  the  training  distribution. 

Building  on  CatRetriever , we  constructed  an  adsorption  energy -based  catalyst 

discovery  pipeline  that  combines  retrieval -guided  candidate  selection  with  adsorption  energy distribution  validation.  This  two -stage  strategy  ensures  both  the  structural  compatibility  of  a

candidate  bulk  with  the  generated  surface  and  its  ability  to  reproduce  adsorption  environments 

within  the  target  energy  range.  This  study  establishes  slab -to -bu lk  retrieval  as  an  essential 

complement  to  catalyst  generative  models,  offering  a physically  grounded  and  modular 

framework  for  connecting  generated  surface  structures  to  bulk -verified  catalyst  candidates. 

Code  Availability 

The  code  developed  in  this  work  and  relevant  information  can  be  found  in  Github 

(https://github.com/SeoinBack/CatRetriever ). 

Acknowledgements 

S.B.  acknowledges  the  support  from  the  Carbon  Neutral  Industrial  Strategic  Technology 

Development  Program  (RS -2023 -00261088)  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Trade,  Industry  &

Energy  (MOTIE,  Korea),  the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea  (NRF)  grants  funded  by 

the  Korea  government  (MSIT)  (RS -2025 -00513832  and  RS -2025 -02214715),  and  the  NRF 

grant  funded  by  the  Korea  government  (MSIT  and  MOE)  (No.  RS -2025 -16063688),  and 

generous  supercomputing  time  from  KISTI.  This  research  was  also  supported  by  Korea  Basic 

Scien ce  Institute  (National  Research  Facilities  and  Equipment  Center)  grant  funded  by  the 

Ministry  of  Science  and  ICT  (No.  RS -2024 -00404602). 

Competing  Interest 

The  authors  declare  no  competing  financial  interests. References 

1.  Nørskov,  J.  K.;  Bligaard,  T.;  Rossmeisl,  J.;  Christensen,  C.  H.  Toward  the 

computational  design  of  solid  catalysts.  Nat.  Chem.  2009 , 1, 37 –46.  DOI: 

10.1038/nchem.121. 

2.  Nørskov,  J.  K.;  Abild -Pedersen,  F.;  Studt,  F.;  Bligaard,  T.  Density  functional  theory  in 

surface  chemistry  and  catalysis.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.  S.  A.  2011 , 108 , 937 –943. 

DOI:  10.1073/pnas.1006652108. 

3.  Medford,  A.  J.;  Vojvodic , A.;  Hummelshøj,  J.  S.;  Voss,  J.;  Abild -Pedersen,  F.;  Studt, 

F.;  Bligaard,  T.;  Nilsson,  A.;  Nørskov,  J.  K.  From  the  Sabatier  principle  to  a predictive 

theory  of  transition -metal  heterogeneous  catalysis.  J.  Catal.  2015 , 328 , 36 –42.  DOI: 

10.1016/j.jcat.2014.12.033. 

4.  Noh,  J.;  Kim,  J.;  Stein,  H.  S.;  Sanchez -Lengeling,  B.;  Gregoire,  J.  M.;  Aspuru -Guzik, 

A.;  Jung,  Y.  Inverse  design  of  solid -state  materials  via  a continuous  representation. 

Matter  2019 , 1, 1370 –1384.  DOI:  10.1016/j.matt.2019.08.017. 

5.  Kolluru,  A.;  Shuaibi,  M.;  Palizhati,  A.;  Shoghi,  N.;  Das,  A.;  Wood,  B.;  Zitnick,  C.  L.; 

Kitchin,  J.  R.;  Ulissi,  Z.  W.  Open  challenges  in  developing  generalizable  large -scale 

machine -learning  models  for  catalyst  discovery.  ACS  Catal.  2022 , 12 , 8572 –8581. 

DOI:  10.1021/acscatal.2c02291. 

6.  Xie,  T.;  Fu,  X.;  Ganea,  O. -E.;  Barzilay,  R.;  Jaakkola,  T.  Crystal  diffusion  variational 

autoencoder  for  periodic  material  generation.  In  International  Conference  on  Learning 

Representations ; 2022. 

7.  Antunes,  L.  M.;  Butler,  K.  T.;  Grau -Crespo,  R.  Crystal  structure  generation  with 

autoregressive  large  language  modeling.  Nat.  Commun.  2024 , 15 , 10570.  DOI: 

10.1038/s41467 -024 -54639 -7. 

8.  Zeni,  C.;  Pinsler,  R.;  Zügner,  D.;  Fowler,  A.;  Horton,  M.;  Fu,  X.;  Wang,  Z.;  Shysheya, 

A.;  Crabbé,  J.;  Ueda,  S.;  et  al.  A generative  model  for  inorganic  materials  design. 

Nature  2025 , 639 , 624 –632.  DOI:  10.1038/s41586 -025 -08628 -5. 

9.  Mok,  D.  H.;  Back,  S.  Generative  pretrained  transformer  for  heterogeneous  catalysts. J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  2024 , 146 , 33712 –33722.  DOI:  10.1021/jacs.4c11504. 

10.  Song,  Z.;  Fan,  L.;  Lu,  S.;  Ling,  C.;  Zhou,  Q.;  Wang,  J.  Inverse  design  of  promising 

electrocatalysts  for  CO2  reduction  via  generative  models  and  bird  swarm  algorithm. 

Nat.  Commun.  2025 , 16 , 1053.  DOI:  10.1038/s41467 -024 -55613 -z. 

11.  Kolluru,  A.;  Kitchin,  J.  R.  AdsorbDiff:  Adsorbate  placement  via  conditional  denoising 

diffusion.  In  Proceedings  of  the  41st  International  Conference  on  Machine  Learning ;

PMLR:  2024;  Vol.  235,  pp  25042 –25057. 

12.  Rønne,  N.;  Aspuru -Guzik,  A.;  Hammer,  B.  Generative  diffusion  model  for  surface 

structure  discovery.  Phys.  Rev.  B 2024 , 110 , 235427.  DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.110.235427. 

13.  Kim,  M.;  Kim,  N.;  Kim,  H.;  Ahn,  S.  CatFlow:  Co -generation  of  slab –adsorbate 

systems  via  flow  matching.  arXiv  2026 , arXiv:2602.05372.  DOI: 

10.48550/arXiv.2602.05372. 

14.  Mok,  D.  H.;  Na,  J.;  Back,  S.  Toward  controllable  catalyst  inverse  design  via  large -

scale  autoregressive  pretraining.  arXiv  2026 , arXiv:2606.17445.  DOI: 

10.48550/arXiv.2606.17445. 

15.  Jain,  A.;  Ong,  S.  P.;  Hautier,  G.;  Chen,  W.;  Richards,  W.  D.;  Dacek,  S.;  Cholia,  S.; 

Gunter,  D.;  Skinner,  D.;  Ceder,  G.;  Persson,  K.  A.  Commentary:  The  Materials  Project: 

A materials  genome  approach  to  accelerating  materials  innovation.  APL  Mater.  2013 ,

1, 011002.  DOI:  10.1063/1.4812323. 

16.  Tran,  R.;  Xu,  Z.;  Radhakrishnan,  B.;  Winston,  D.;  Sun,  W.;  Persson,  K.  A.;  Ong,  S.  P. 

Surface  energies  of  elemental  crystals.  Sci.  Data  2016 , 3, 160080.  DOI: 

10.1038/sdata.2016.80. 

17.  Aykol,  M.;  Dwaraknath , S.  S.;  Sun,  W.;  Persson,  K.  A.  Thermodynamic  limit  for 

synthesis  of  metastable  inorganic  materials.  Sci.  Adv.  2018 , 4, eaaq0148.  DOI: 

10.1126/sciadv.aaq0148. 

18.  Koker,  T.;  Quigley,  K.;  Spaeth,  W.;  Frey,  N.  C.;  Li,  L.  Graph  contrastive  learning  for 

materials.  arXiv  2022 , arXiv:2211.13408.  DOI:  10.48550/arXiv.2211.13408. 19.  Radford,  A.;  Kim,  J.  W.;  Hallacy,  C.;  Ramesh,  A.;  Goh,  G.;  Agarwal,  S.;  Sastry,  G.; 

Askell,  A.;  Mishkin,  P.;  Clark,  J.;  et  al.  Learning  transferable  visual  models  from 

natural  language  supervision.  In  Proceedings  of  the  38th  International  Conference  on 

Machine  Learning ; PMLR:  2021;  Vol.  139,  pp  8748 –8763. 

20.  Chanussot,  L.;  Das,  A.;  Goyal,  S.;  Lavril,  T.;  Shuaibi,  M.;  Riviere,  M.;  Tran,  K.;  Heras -

Domingo,  J.;  Ho,  C.;  Hu,  W.;  et  al.  Open  Catalyst  2020  (OC20)  dataset  and  community 

challenges.  ACS  Catal.  2021 , 11 , 6059 –6072.  DOI:  10.1021/acscatal.0c04525. 

21.  Wood,  B.  M.;  Dzamba,  M.;  Fu,  X.;  Gao,  M.;  Shuaibi,  M.;  Barroso -Luque,  L.; 

Abdelmaqsoud,  K.;  Gharakhanyan,  V.;  Kitchin,  J.  R.;  Levine,  D.  S.;  et  al.  UMA:  A

family  of  universal  models  for  atoms.  arXiv  2025 , arXiv:2506.23971.  DOI: 

10.48550/arXiv.2506.23971. 

22.  Sun,  W.;  Ceder,  G.  Efficient  creation  and  convergence  of  surface  slabs.  Surf.  Sci.  2013 ,

617 , 53 –59.  DOI:  10.1016/j.susc.2013.05.016. 

23.  Chen,  T.;  Kornblith , S.;  Norouzi,  M.;  Hinton,  G.  A simple  framework  for  contrastive 

learning  of  visual  representations.  In  Proceedings  of  the  37th  International  Conference 

on  Machine  Learning ; PMLR:  2020;  Vol.  119,  pp  1597 –1607. 

24.  Schüth,  F.;  Palkovits,  R.;  Schlögl,  R.;  Su,  D.  S.  Ammonia  as  a possible  element  in  an 

energy  infrastructure:  Catalysts  for  ammonia  decomposition.  Energy  Environ.  Sci. 

2012 , 5, 6278 –6289.  DOI:  10.1039/C2EE02865D. 

25.  Bell,  T.  E.;  Torrente -Murciano , L.  H2  production  via  ammonia  decomposition  using 

non -noble  metal  catalysts:  A review.  Top.  Catal.  2016 , 59 , 1438 –1457.  DOI: 

10.1007/s11244 -016 -0653 -4. 

26.  Yang,  J.;  Ye,  K.;  Xie,  S.;  Li,  Q.;  Milhans,  C.;  Liu,  F.;  Che,  F.  Diffusion  model -guided 

inverse  design  of  bimetallic  catalysts  for  ammonia  decomposition.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc. 

2026 , 148 , 537 –546.  DOI:  10.1021/jacs.5c14652. 

27.  Ong,  S.  P.;  Richards,  W.  D.;  Jain,  A.;  Hautier,  G.;  Kocher,  M.;  Cholia , S.;  Gunter,  D.; 

Chevrier,  V.  L.;  Persson,  K.  A.;  Ceder,  G.  Python  Materials  Genomics  (pymatgen):  A

robust,  open -source  Python  library  for  materials  analysis.  Comput.  Mater.  Sci.  2013 ,68 , 314 –319.  DOI:  10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.10.028. Supplementary  Information  for 

# "CatRetriever:  Contrastive  Representation 

# Learning  for  Slab -to -Bulk  Retrieval  in  Generative 

# Catalyst  Discovery "

Jungho  Oh 1,† , Woosung  Kim 2,† , Dong  Hyeon  Mok  3, Jonggeol  Na 4,5,6*  and  Seoin  Back 1,6,7,8* 

AUTHOR  ADDRESS 

> 1

KU -KIST  Graduate  School  of  Converging  Science  and  Technology,  Korea  University,  Seoul 

02841,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 2

Department  of  Materials  Science  and  Engineering,  Korea  University,  Seoul  02841,  Republic 

of  Korea 

> 3

Department  of  Chemical  and  Biomolecular  Engineering,  Institute  of  Emergent  Materials, 

Sogang  University,  Seoul  04107,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 4

Department  of  Chemical  Engineering  and  Materials  Science,  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul 

03760,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 5

Department  of  Chemical  Engineering,  Graduate  Program  in  System  Health  Science  and 

Engineering,  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul,  03760,  Republic  of  Korea 

> 6

Institute  for  Multiscale  Matter  and  Systems  (IMMS),  Ewha  Womans  University,  Seoul  03760, 

Republic  of  Korea 

> 7

Department  of  Integrat ive  Energy  Engineering,  Korea  University,  Seoul  02841,  Republic  of 

Korea 

> 8

Center  for  Hydrogen  and  Fuel  Cells,  Korea  Institute  of  Science  and  Technology(KIST),  Seoul 

02792,  Republic  of  Korea 

> †

These  authors  contributed  equally  to  this  work. Supplementary  Note  S1.  Generation  of  slab  structures  from  Materials  Project  bulk 

crystals 

To  describe  the  slab -generation  procedure  used  in  this  study,  we  provide  a

representative  workflow  for  constructing  surface  slab  models  from  Materials  Project  bulk 

structure.  While  the  main  text  briefly  describes  the  generation  of  slab  structures  from  each 

parent  bulk,  this  supplementary  note  provides  the  corresponding  implementation  details  and 

illustrates  how  multiple  slab  configurations  can  be  obtained  from  a single  bulk  crystal. 

As  a representative  example,  the  bulk  structure  with  Materials  Project  ID  mp -862690 

was  retrieved  using  the  Materials  Project  API 1. The  obtained  pymatgen  Structure  object 2 was 

converted  into  an  ASE  Atoms  object 3 and  subsequently  used  to  initialize  the  Bulk  object  in  the 

FAIRChem/Open  Catalyst  Project 4 slab -generation  workflow.  Slab  structures  were  then 

generated  for  the  Miller  indices  used  in  this  study:  (100),  (110),  (111),  (210),  and  (221).  For 

each  Miller  index,  the  Slab.from_bulk_get_specific_millers( ) method  was  used  to  enumerate 

the  possible  surface  terminations  associated  with  the  corresponding  crystallographic 

orientation. 

This  procedure  allows  a single  parent  bulk  structure  to  yield  multiple  slab  models,  as 

distinct  atomic  terminations  can  be  exposed  even  for  the  same  Miller  plane.  Consequently,  the 

generated  slab  database  includes  variations  in  both  surface  orientation  and  termination -

dependent  local  atomic  environments.  These  slab  structures  were  used  as  surface -query 

representations  for  retrieval  model  training  and  evaluation.  Representative  code  for  generating 

slab  structures  from  mp -862690  is  provided  in  Code  S1 . The  bulk  structure  of  mp -862690,  and 

the  corresponding  generated  slab  structures  are  shown  in  Fig.  S1 .Code  S1.  Representative  code  for  generating  slab  structures  from  mp -862690. Figure  S1.  The  bulk  structure  of  mp -862690  and  the  generated  representative  slab  structures. 

(a)  bulk  structure  for  mp -862690,  generated  slabs  for  (b)  (100),  (c)  (110),  (d)  (111),  (e)  (210), 

(f)  (221). Supplementary  Note  S2.  UMA -based  structure  embeddings  and  contrastive  training  for 

CatRetriever. 

S2.1.  Extraction  of  UMA  structure  embeddings  and  scalar -channel  pooling 

The  bulk –slab  contrastive  learning  model  was  constructed  using  structure -level 

embeddings  extracted  from  a pretrained  UMA  backbone.  In  this  study,  we  used  the  UMA -s-

1p1  model 5 as  the  atomistic  representation  model.  During  contrastive  learning,  the  UMA 

backbone  was  kept  frozen,  and  only  the  projection  heads  mapping  the  bulk  and  slab 

embeddings  into  the  shared  retrieval  space  were  trained.  The  procedure  used  to  extract 

structure -level  embeddings  from  the  frozen  backbone  is  described  below. 

For  each  input  structure  containing  N atoms,  node -level  representations  were  extracted 

from  the  frozen  UMA  backbone  by  registering  a forward  hook  on  the  frozen  backbone,  prior 

to  the  trainable  projection  heads  used  in  the  contrastive  learning  model.  The  extracted  node 

embedding  has  a tensor  shape  of  ([ N, 9,  128]),  where  N is  the  number  of  atoms  and  128  is  the 

feature  dimension.  The  second  dimension  of  size  9 originates  from  the  spherical  harmonic 

components  associated  with  the  equivariant  representation,  corresponding  to  (l = 0,  1,  2) 

components. 

To  construct  a fixed -length,  rotation -invariant  structure -level  embedding,  only  the  (l  =

0)  scalar  channel  was  used.  Specifically,  the  first  channel  of  the  ([ N, 9,  128])  node 

representation  was  selected,  yielding  a scalar  node  representation  of  shape  ([ N, 128]).  Mean 

pooling  was  then  applied  over  the  atomic  dimension  to  obtain  a single  ([128]) -dimensional 

vector  for  each  structure.  Importantly,  the  full  ([ N, 9,  128])  tensor  was  not  averaged  directly. 

Instead,  only  the  (l = 0)  scalar  component  was  pooled,  ensuring  that  the  resulting  structure -

level  embedding  was  suitable  for  similarity -based  retrieval. 

S2.2.  Projection  heads  and  retrieval -score  definition 

The  resulting  128 -dimensional  bulk  and  slab  embeddings  were  separately  passed 

through  trainable  projection  heads.  Each  projection  head  consisted  of  a two -layer  multilayer 

perceptron  with  a hidden  dimension  of  256:  a linear  layer  from  128  to  256  dimensions,  a ReLU 

activation  function,  and  a final  linear  layer  from  256  to  128  dimensions.  The  projected  bulk and  slab  embeddings  were  L2 -normalized  along  the  feature  dimension  before  computing  dot -

product  similarity.  This  normalization  constrains  each  latent  vector  to  have  unit  length,  so  that 

the  dot  product  between  two  normalized  embeddings  is  equivalent  to  cos ine  similarity.  As  a

result,  the  retrieval  score  depends  on  the  angular  similarity  between  slab  and  bulk  embeddings 

rather  than  on  their  vector  magnitudes,  preventing  similarity  values  from  being  dominated  by 

differences  in  embedding  norm. 

S2.3.  Contrastive  training,  validation,  and  model  selection 

CatRetriever  was  trained  using  a single -positive  InfoNCE 6 objective  for  slab -to -bulk 

retrieval.  For  each  mini -batch  of  B slab  queries,  the  corresponding  positive  label  was  defined 

as  the  index  of  the  true  parent  bulk  within  the  candidate  bulk  pool.  Unlike  standard  in -batch 

contrastive  learning,  where  only  the  bulk  structures  present  in  the  mini -batch  serve  as 

negatives,  eac h slab  query  was  compared  against  the  full  candidate  bulk  pool  used  for  training. 

For  a full  candidate  pool  containing  M bulk  structures,  the  slab -to -bulk  loss  was  defined  as 

𝐿 𝑠 →𝑏  = − 1

𝐵  ∑ log  exp  (𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝒛 𝑖 

> 𝑠

, 𝒛 𝑦 𝑖  

> 𝑏

)/τ)

∑ exp (𝑠𝑖𝑚 (𝒛 𝑖 

> 𝑠

, 𝒛 𝑚  

> 𝑏

)/τ)𝑀 

> 𝑚 =1
> 𝐵
> 𝑖 =1

where  𝒛 𝑖  

> 𝑠

is  the  normalized  latent  embedding  of  the  𝑖 -th  slab  query,  𝒛 𝑚  

> 𝑏

is  the  normalized  latent 

embedding  of  the  𝑚 -th  candidate  bulk,  𝑦 𝑖  is the  index  of  the  true  parent  bulk  of  the  𝑖 -th  slab 

query,  and  𝜏  is  the  temperature  parameter.  The  similarity  function  𝑠𝑖𝑚 ( , ) was  computed  as  the 

dot  product  between  normalized  embeddings,  which  is  equivalent  to  cosine  similarity.  This 

objective  encourages  each  slab  query  to  retrieve  its  true  parent  bulk  from  the  full  candidate 

pool,  rather  than  only  distinguishing  it  from  bulk  structures  within  the  same  mini -batch .

Training  was  performed  with  a fixed  bulk -level  data  split  (random  seed  of  0).  Of  the 

38,901  bulk  structures,  31,120  were  assigned  to  the  training  pool,  while  the  remaining  7,781 

bulk  structures  were  reserved  as  a holdout  set.  Slab –bulk  pairs  associated  wit h the  training -

pool  bulks  were  divided  into  707,336  training  pairs,  177,123  validation  pairs,  and  220,181  in -

distribution  test  pairs.  The  bulk -holdout  test  set  contained  279,500  slab –bulk  pairs  derived  from bulk  structures  that  were  not  included  in  the  training  pool. 

The  model  was  trained  using  the  AdamW  optimizer 7 with  a learning  rate  of  0.001,  a

batch  size  of  64,  and  an  InfoNCE  temperature  of  0.07.  Validation  retrieval  performance  was 

evaluated  after  each  epoch,  and  validation  R@1  was  used  as  the  criterion  for  model  selection. 

Early  stopping  was  applied  when  the  validation  R@1  did  not  improve  for  10  consecutive 

epochs.  As  shown  in  Figure  S2 , the  training  loss  decreased  steadily  during  optimization,  while 

the  validation  retrieval  performance  improved  steadily  before  reaching  a plateau.  The  best 

checkpoint  was  selected  at  epoch  22,  yielding  a validation  R@1  of  0.9321. 

The  selected  checkpoint  was  evaluated  on  both  the  in -distribution  and  holdout  test  sets 

against  the  full  candidate  pool  of  38,901  bulk  structures.  The  model  achieved  R@1  and  R@3 

values  of  0.9195  and  0.9880,  respectively,  on  the  in -distribution  test  set,  an d 0.9151  and  0.9896, 

respectively,  on  the  holdout  test  set. 

Figure  S2.  Training  and  validation  behavior  of  CatRetriever.  (a)  Training  InfoNCE  loss  as  a

function  of  epoch.  The  selected  checkpoint  was  obtained  at  epoch  22.  (b)  Validation  R@1  and 

R@3  during  training.  The  final  checkpoint  was  selected  based  on  the  highest  validation  R@1, 

with  early  stopping  applied  after  10  epochs  without  further  improvement. 

Supplementary  Note  S3.  CatGPT -based  generation  and  screening  of  adsorption structures 

Conditional  CatGPT 8 was  used  to  generate  N* -adsorbed  slab  structures  under  a target 

adsorption  energy  condition  relevant  to  thermal  ammonia  decomposition.  The  adsorbate  token, 

N,  and  a target  N*  adsorption  energy  of  -0.90  eV 9 were  provided  to  the  conditional  generation 

model.  Stochastic  sampling  was  performed  with  a maximum  sequence  length  of  1,024  tokens 

until  a total  of  10,000  outputs  that  could  be  successfully  reconstructed  as  ASE  Atoms  objects 

were  obtained.  Outputs  that  could  not  be  parsed  into  valid  periodic  atomic  structures  were 

discarded  during  generation. 

The  generated  textual  representations  were  converted  into  periodic  adsorption 

structures  using  the  lattice  parameters,  slab  atomic  coordinates,  and  N*  coordinates  contained 

in  the  model  outputs.  The  generated  N atom  was  assigned  a separate  atomic  tag,  allo wing  it  to 

be  distinguished  from  constituent  N atoms  in  the  slab  during  subsequent  structure  processing 

and  energy  evaluation. 

Adsorption  energies  were  evaluated  using  the  UMA -s-1p1  model  following  the  energy 

definition  and  convergence  criterion  described  in  Supplementary  Note  S4 . For  each  CatGPT -

generated  adsorption  structure,  the  corresponding  clean  slab  was  constructed  by  removing  the 

tagged  N adsorbate.  The  N-adsorbed  slab  and  the  corresponding  clean  slab  were  independently 

relaxed  using  the  BFGS  optimizer  for  up  to  200  optimi zation  steps  with  a maximum -force 

convergence  criterion  of  0.05  eV  Å-1. A generated  structure  was  included  in  the  adsorption 

energy  analysis  only  if  both  the  adsorbed  and  clean  slab  structures  satisfied  the  convergence 

criterion. 

As  shown  in  Figure  S4 , 581  of  the  10,000  generated  structures  exhibited  UMA -

evaluated  N*  adsorption  energies  within  the  target  window  of  -1.00  to  -0.80  eV,  corresponding 

to  5.81%  of  the  generated  structures.  These  structures  were  retained  as  query  slabs  for 

subsequent  parent -bulk  retrieval. 

For  the  retrieval  analysis,  the  tagged  N adsorbate  was  removed  from  each  selected 

structure.  A structure -level  embedding  was  then  extracted  from  the  resulting  adsorbate -free 

slab  using  the  UMA -based  embedding  procedure  described  in  Supplementary  Note  S2 .Figure  S3.  Distribution  of  UMA -evaluated  N*  adsorption  energies  for  the  CatGPT -generated 

adsorption  structures.  Among  the  10,000  generated  structures,  581  structures  exhibited 

adsorption  energies  within  the  target  window  and  were  selected  for  subsequent  parent -bulk 

retrieval. Supplementary  Note  S4.  Selection  of  the  retrieval -score  threshold 

For  application  to  previously  unseen  slab  structures,  the  true  parent  bulk  is  not 

available,  and  the  top -1 retrieval  score  must  therefore  be  interpreted  as  a confidence  measure 

for  the  predicted  slab –bulk  correspondence.  An  operational  score  threshold  was  introduced  to 

distinguish  plausible  slab –bulk  matches  from  low -confidence  retrievals  before  proceeding  to 

downstream  candidate  evaluation. 

For  each  slab  query  in  the  evaluation  set,  the  highest -scoring  bulk  candidate  was 

regarded  as  the  top -1 prediction.  A retrieval  was  considered  correct  if  the  top -1 prediction 

corresponded  to  the  true  parent  bulk.  At  each  score  threshold,  only  predictions  with  a top -1

retrieval  score  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  threshold  were  accepted. 

Precision  was  defined  as  the  fraction  of  accepted  predictions  for  which  the  top -ranked 

bulk  candidate  was  correct.  Recall  was  defined  as  the  fraction  of  all  correctly  retrieved  top -1

predictions  that  remained  after  applying  the  score  threshold.  Thus,  precision  measures  the 

reliability  of  the  accepted  predictions,  whereas  recall  measures  how  many  of  the  correctly 

retrieved  cases  are  retained  after  thresholding. 

Figure  S5  shows  the  variation  in  precision  and  recall  as  a function  of  the  minimum 

accepted  top -1 retrieval  score.  Precision  remained  above  0.90  with  only  limited  variation  over 

the  relevant  threshold  range.  In  contrast,  recall  decreased  more  noticeably  as  the  threshold 

increased,  as  some  correctly  retrieved  predictions  were  excluded  due  to  their  lowe r retrieval 

scores. 

Because  the  subsequent  catalyst  discovery  workflow  was  intended  to  retain  most 

plausible  bulk  candidates  while  excluding  low -confidence  matches,  recall  was  used  as  the 

primary  criterion  for  threshold  selection.  A target  recall  of  0.90  was  selected,  and  the 

operational  threshold  was  defined  as  the  highest  score  threshold  that  retained  at  least  90%  of 

all  correctly  retrieved  top -1 predictions. 

This  procedure  resulted  in  a top -1 retrieval -score  threshold  of  0.84.  At  this  threshold, 

90%  of  the  correctly  retrieved  cases  were  retained,  while  93%  of  the  accepted  predictions 

corresponded  to  the  correct  parent  bulk.  Therefore,  slab –bulk  matches  with  a top -1 retrieval 

score  of  0.84  or  higher  were  regarded  as  plausible  matches  in  the  subsequent  catalyst  discovery 

analysis. The  selected  threshold  should  be  interpreted  as  an  application -dependent  operating 

point  rather  than  a universal  boundary  separating  correct  and  incorrect  retrievals.  A higher 

threshold  may  be  preferred  when  reducing  false -positive  assignments  is  prioritiz ed,  whereas  a

lower  threshold  may  be  used  when  retaining  a broader  range  of  potentially  relevant  candidates 

is  more  important. 

Figure  S4.  Selection  of  the  retrieval -score  threshold.  Precision  and  recall  as  a function  of  the 

minimum  accepted  top -1 retrieval  score.  The  horizontal  dotted  line  indicates  the  target  recall 

of  0.90,  and  the  vertical  dashed  line  indicates  the  selected  threshold  of  0.84.  At  this  threshold, 

the  precision  and  recall  were  0.93  and  0.90,  respectively. Supplementary  Note  S5.  MatterGen -based  bulk  generation  and  post -generation 

analysis  expansion  of  the  bulk  candidate  search  space 

S5.1.  Conditional  generation  of  bulk  candidates  using  MatterGen 

To  expand  the  bulk  candidate  search  space  beyond  the  Materials  Project -derived 

database,  we  used  MatterGen 10  to  generate  additional  bulk  structures  under  property -

conditioned  generation.  This  step  was  introduced  for  discovery  scenarios  in  which  database -

based  retrieval  alone  may  not  provide  structurally  or  compositionally  suitable  bulk  candidates 

for  a given  sla b query.  The  generated  structures  were  incorporated  into  the  existing  bulk 

candidate  pool  and  subsequently  evaluated  through  the  same  slab -to -bulk  retrieval  workflow. 

In  this  study,  MatterGen  bulk  generation  was  conditioned  on  both  the  chemical  system 

and  the  energy  above  the  hull.  The  chemical  system  was  set  to  match  that  of  the  input  slab 

query,  thereby  constraining  the  generated  structures  to  contain  the  same  elemental  components 

as  the  tar get  surface.  The  energy  above  the  hull  was  set  to  0.1  eV/atom,  consistent  with  the 

stability  criterion  used  for  constructing  the  Materials  Project -derived  bulk  candidate  database. 

We  used  the  pretrained  MatterGen  checkpoint  “chemical_system_energy_above_hull”,  which 

supports  joint  conditioning  on  chemical  system  and  energy  above  the  hull. 

A representative  command  used  for  MatterGen -based  bulk  generation  is  shown  in 

Code  S2 . For  a target  chemical  system,  Al -Ti,  candidate  bulk  structures  were  generated  with  a

batch  size  of  64  and  one  generation  batch.  The  diffusion  guidance  factor  was  set  to  2.0  to  guide 

the  generation  process  toward  the  specified  property  conditions.  The  gen erated  bulk  structures 

were  then  added  to  the  candidate  bulk  pool,  embedded  using  the  same  UMA -based  embedding 

procedure,  and  ranked  against  the  slab  query  using  the  trained  slab -to -bulk  retrieval  model. 

The  resulting  bulk  structures  are  shown  in  Figure  S3 .

S5.2.  Redundancy  and  MP -overlap  analysis  of  MatterGen -generated  bulk  candidates 

Because  MatterGen  was  used  here  as  an  external  candidate -generation  module,  we  did 

not  attempt  to  evaluate  the  full  generative  performance  of  MatterGen.  Instead,  we  performed  a

lightweight  post -generation  analysis  to  determine  whether  the  MatterGen -generat ed  bulk 

candidates  used  in  our  workflow  were  redundant  with  one  another  or  overlapped  with  the  MP -retrieved  top -1 bulk  candidates.  This  analysis  was  intended  to  assess  whether  the  MatterGen 

step  expanded  the  candidate  pool  beyond  the  existing  MP -retrieval  result,  rather  than  to 

benchmark  MatterGen  as  a generative  model. 

The  analysis  was  performed  for  low -scoring  query  cases,  defined  as  query  slabs  whose 

best  MP  retrieval  score  was  below  0.84.  For  each  such  query,  we  compared  the  MP -retrieved 

top -1 bulk  with  the  corresponding  MatterGen -generated  bulk  candidates  produced  under  the 

same  chemical  system  condition.  Structural  equivalence  was  evaluated  using  the 

StructureMatcher  implemented  in  pymatgen 2 with  the  following  parameters: 

ltol  = 0.2 

stol  = 0.3 

angle_tol  = 5

primitive_cell  = True 

scale  = True 

attempt_supercell  = True 

allow_subset  = False 

For  each  query -level  candidate  set,  the  MP -retrieved  top -1 bulk  and  the  MatterGen -

generated  bulk  candidates  were  partitioned  into  StructureMatcher -unique  groups.  We 

computed  three  redundancy  metrics.  First,  the  total  duplicate  ratio  was  defined  as 

> 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 −𝑁 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒
> 𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙

, where  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  is  the  total  number  of  structures  in  the  combined  MP  + MatterGen 

candidate  set  and  𝑁 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑒  is  the  number  of  StructureMatcher -unique  groups.  Second,  the 

MatterGen  internal  duplicate  ratio  was  computed  using  only  the  MatterGen -generated 

candidates  for  𝑁 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙  . Third,  the  MP -overlap  ratio  was  defined  as  the  fraction  of  MatterGen -

generated  candidates  assigned  to  the  same  equivalence  group  as  the  MP -retrieved  top -1 bulk. 

All  381  low -confidence  query  cases  were  successfully  analyzed.  Each  query -level 

candidate  set  contained  64  MatterGen -generated  candidates.  The  mean  total  duplicate  ratio  in 

the  combined  MP  + MatterGen  candidate  pool  was  18.8%,  with  a median  value  of  15.4%.  The 

MatterGen  internal  duplicate  ratio  was  similar,  with  a mean  of  18.5%  and  a median  of  15.6%, 

indicating  that  most  duplicate  structures  originated  from  redundancy  within  the  MatterGen -

generated  candidate  set.  In  contrast,  the  overlap  between  MatterGen -generated  candi dates  and the  MP -retrieved  top -1 bulk  was  low,  with  a mean  MP -overlap  ratio  of  1.16%  and  a median 

value  of  0%.  These  results  indicate  that  the  MatterGen -generated  candidates  generally 

expanded  the  candidate  space  beyond  the  MP -retrieval  result,  rather  than  simply  reproducing 

the  same  bulk  structure.  Redundancy  and  MP -overlap  statistics  for  MatterGen -generated 

candidates  are  shown  in  Table  S3 .

Code  S2.  Representative  MatterGen  command  for  chemical -system - and  stability -conditioned 

bulk  generation. Figure  S3.  Representative  bulk  structures  of  a target  chemical  system,  Al -Ti,  generated  by 

MatterGen  for  search  space  expansion. 

Table  S1.  Representative  high -scoring  MatterGen -generated  bulk  candidates  for  low -

confidence  MP  retrieval  cases. 

Query adslab 

chemical system 

MP -retrieved 

top -1 bulk 

MP -retrieved 

top -1 bulk score 

MatterGen -generated 

top -1 bulk score 

Ca -Zn  mp -2786  0.799  0.955 

Al -Fe -Ge  mp -1183187  0.798  0.933 

Ca -In -Zn  mp -1183608  0.797  0.916 

Al -Co -Hf  mp -5221  0.796  0.915 

In -Zr  mp -20800  0.795  0.906 

Ca -Cd  mp -1183501  0.795  0.906 Hf -Pd -Re  mp -1184592  0.795  0.904 

Table  S2.  Structural  comparison  of  representative  high -scoring  cases  listed  in  Table  S1. 

Chemical system  Query slab  MP -retrieved 

top -1 bulk 

MatterGen -generated 

top -1 bulk 

Ca -Zn 

Al -Fe -Ge 

Ca -In -Zn 

Al -Co -Hf 

In -Zr 

Ca -Cd Hf -Pd -Re 

Table  S3.  Redundancy  and  MP -overlap  statistics  for  MatterGen -generated  bulk  candidates. 

Metric  Value 

Mean total duplicate ratio in MP + MatterGen pool  18.8% 

Median total duplicate ratio in MP + MatterGen pool  15.4% 

Mean MatterGen internal duplicate ratio  18.5% 

Median MatterGen internal duplicate ratio  15.6% 

Mean MatterGen –MP top -1 overlap ratio  1.16% 

Median MatterGen –MP top -1 overlap ratio  0.0% Supplementary  Note  S6.  Computational  resources 

All  model  training,  evaluation,  and  adsorption  energy  calculations  were  performed 

using  one  CPU  core  of  an  Intel  Xeon  Platinum  8452Y  processor  and  a single  NVIDIA  RTX 

A6000  GPU  with  48  GB  of  memory. Supplementary  Note  S7.  Additional  results  for  the  catalyst  discovery  application 

The  representative  MP -retrieved  NbS  and  MatterGen -generated  Ca₃Cd  candidates 

shown  in  Figures  3c  and  3d  were  selected  through  the  sequential  screening  procedure  used  in 

the  catalyst -discovery  application.  Both  candidates  first  exceeded  the  CatRetriever  retrieval -

score  threshold  of  0.84.  Query -slab -oriented  adsorption  energy  validation  was  subsequently 

performed  by  constructing  surfaces  with  the  same  Miller  indices  as  the  corresponding  CatGPT -

generated  query  slabs  and  evaluating  their  N*  adsorption  energ y distributions  following  the 

procedure  described  in  Supplementary  Note  S4 . As  summarized  in  Table  S4 , both  candidates 

exhibited  adsorption  environments  within  the  target  binding  energy  window  of  −1.00  to  −0.80 

eV.  Because  they  satisfied  both  the  retrieval -score  and  query -orientation  adsorption  energy 

criteria,  their  bulk -level  properties  were  further  exa mined  and  presented  as  representative 

application  cases  in  Figures  3c  and  3d .

Table  S4.  Retrieval  scores  and  query -orientation  adsorption  energy  validation  results  for  the 

representative  NbS  and  Ca₃Cd  application  cases. 

Retrieval score  Query -slab -oriented adsorption energy 

validation 

NbS 

(MP -retrieved 

bulk candidate) 

0.920 Ca 3Cd 

(MatterGen -

generated 

bulk candidate) 

0.906 

Supplementary  Note  S8.  DFT  evaluation 

The  generated  unit  cell  contained  nine  Ca  atoms  and  three  Cd  atoms,  corresponding  to 

three  formula  units  of  Ca₃Cd.  Because  the  MatterGen -generated  Ca₃Cd  structure  was  not 

available  in  the  Materials  Project  database,  its  formation  energy  was  evaluated  using  an  MP -

compatible  density  functional  theory  workflow.  All  calculations  were  performed  using  VASP 

(vasp  6.4.1) 11  through  the  Atomic  Simulation  Environment  (ASE;  version  3.26.0),  with  input 

parameters  generated  using  pymatgen  (version  2024.8.9).  The  Perdew –Burke –Ernzerhof 

(PBE)  exchange –correlation  functional 12  and  the  Materials  Project -compatible  projector -

augmented -wave  potentials 13  were  employed.  The  INCAR  parameters  and  k-point  meshes 

were  generated  using  the  MPMetalRelaxSet  class  implemented  in  pymatgen.  To  remain 

consistent  with  the  Materials  Project  relaxation  protocol,  structural  optimization  was 

performed  sequentially  in  three  stages:  an  initial  loose  cell  optimization  with  ISIF  = 7,

followed  by  two  full  structural  optimizations  with  ISIF  = 3. In  the  initial  relaxation,  a plane -

wave  cutoff  energy  of  350  eV  was  used,  and  the  electronic  convergence  threshold  was  set  to 

ten  times  the  corresponding  MPMetalRelaxSet  value.  The  subsequent  two  relaxations 

employed  the  cutoff  energy,  electronic  convergence  threshold,  smearing  parameters,  spin 

settings,  and  ionic  relaxation  parameters  generated  by  MPMetalRelaxSet . The  Ca₉Cd ₃

structure  and  the  elemental  Ca  and  Cd  reference  structures  were  all  calculated  using  the  same 

three -stage  MP -compatible  workflow  to  ensure  consistency  in  the  formation -energy 

evaluation. 

The  calculated  total  energies  of  Ca₉Cd₃,  elemental  Ca,  and  elemental  Cd  were −22.526629,  −2.001918,  and  −0.914590  eV,  respectively.  The  formation  energy  per  atom  was 

calculated  as 

∆𝐸 𝑓 (𝐶 𝑎 3𝐶𝑑 ) = 𝐸 𝐷𝐹𝑇 (𝐶 𝑎 9𝐶 𝑑 3) − 9𝐸 𝐷𝐹𝑇 (𝐶𝑎 ) − 3𝐸 𝐷𝐹𝑇 (𝐶𝑑 )

12  ,

yielding 

∆𝐸 𝑓 (𝐶 𝑎 3𝐶𝑑 ) = −0.147133  eV/atom. 

The  energy  above  hull  was  subsequently  evaluated  using  the  Ca –Cd  phase  diagram  provided 

by  the  Materials  Project,  accessed  on  25  June , 2026.  At  the  Ca₃Cd  composition,  corresponding 

to  a Cd  atomic  fraction  of  0.25,  the  convex  hull  is  defined  by  elemental  Ca  (mp -45,  ∆𝐸 𝑓  = 0

eV/atom)  and  the  stable  Ca₃Cd₂  phase  (mp -18167,  ∆𝐸 𝑓  = −0.273  eV/atom).  Linear 

interpolation  between  these  phases  gives  a hull  energy  of 

𝐸 ℎ𝑢𝑙𝑙 , 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒  = 0.25  

> 0.40

(−0.273 ) = −0.170625  eV/atom. 

Accordingly,  the  energy  above  hull  of  the  generated  Ca₃Cd  structure  was  calculated  as 

𝐸 𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑣𝑒  ℎ𝑢𝑙𝑙  = − 0.147133  − (−0.170625 ) = 0.023492  eV/atom, 

which  was  rounded  to  0.024  eV/atom.  This  low  energy  above  hull  indicates  that  the  MatterGen -

generated  Ca₃Cd  structure  is  close  to  the  thermodynamic  convex  hull  and  is  therefore  a

thermodynamically  plausible  metastable  candidate. Supplementary  Note  S9.  Adsorption -configuration  generation,  redundancy  filtering, 

and  adsorption  energy  evaluation 

Surface  slabs  were  constructed  using  the  FAIRChem/Open  Catalyst  Project  workflow 

described  in  Supplementary  Note  S1 . For  the  downstream  screening  of  bulk  candidates, 

query -oriented  adsorption  energy  validation  was  performed  to  enable  direct  evaluation  of  the 

query -oriented  surface.  For  the  selected  final  candidates,  multi -orientation  adsorption  energy 

analysis  was  perf ormed.  Here,  the  surface  space  was  expanded  to  the  (100),  (110),  (111),  (210), 

and  (221)  facets.  All  slab  terminations  generated  for  each  crystallographic  orientation  were 

included  to  evaluate  the  adsorption  energy  distribution  of  each  bulk  candidate  over  a broader 

ran ge  of  possible  surfaces. 

For  each  slab,  N*  adsorption  configurations  were  generated  using  the  heuristic 

and  random_site_heuristic_placement  modes  implemented  in 

AdsorbateSlabConfig 4. The  configurations  identified  by  the  heuristic  placement 

procedure  were  supplemented  with  100  random -site  heuristic  placements  per  slab  to  sample 

additional  local  adsorption  environments.  The  configurations  generated  by  the  two  placement 

procedures  were  combined  before  redundancy  filtering. 

Because  the  heuristic  and  random -site  placement  procedures  could  generate  repeated 

configurations,  graph -based  redundancy  filtering  was  performed  before  structural  relaxation 14 .

Each  adsorbate –slab  configuration  was  represented  as  a graph  describing  the  local  chemical 

environment  surrounding  the  adsorbate.  Atomic  connectivity  was  determined  using  an  ASE neighbor  list  based  on  element -dependent  natural  cutoff  radii,  with  a cutoff  multiplier  of  1.1 

and  a skin  distance  of  0.25  Å.  Periodic  connectivity  parallel  to  the  slab  surface  was  included 

during  graph  construction. 

Atoms  and  atomic  connections  were  represented  as  graph  nodes  and  edges, 

respectively.  Adsorbate  and  surface  atoms  were  distinguished  through  node  attributes,  while 

the  elemental  identities  of  connected  atomic  pairs  were  retained  as  edge  labels.  Two 

configu rations  were  considered  redundant  when  their  labeled  local -environment  graphs  were 

isomorphic  under  the  defined  node - and  edge -matching  criteria.  For  each  group  of  matching 

configurations,  only  one  representative  structure  was  retained  for  subsequent  relax ation  and 

energy  evaluation. 

The  clean  slab  and  each  retained  adsorbate –slab  configuration  were  independently 

relaxed  using  the  pretrained  UMA -s-1p1  model  with  the  OC20  task  setting.  Structural 

optimization  was  performed  using  an  ASE  quasi -Newton  optimizer  for  up  to  200  optimization 

steps,  with  a maximum -force  convergence  criterion  of  0.05  eV  Å-1.

The  N*  adsorption  energy  was  calculated  as  the  difference  between  the  energy  of  the 

relaxed  N-adsorbed  slab  and  the  energy  of  the  corresponding  relaxed  clean  slab,  with  the 

atomic  reference  energy  of  nitrogen  subtracted.  Here,  the  energy  of  the  N-adsorbed  slab  refers 

to  the  total  energy  after  relaxation  with  the  adsorbed  nitrogen  atom,  and  the  clean  slab  energy 

corresponds  to  the  relaxed  slab  without  the  adsorbate.  The  nitrogen  reference  energy  was  set 

to  −8.083  eV  according  to  the  energy -reference  conventi on  used  for  the  OC20  task. 

The  adsorption  energies  obtained  from  the  retained  configurations  were  aggregated  to 

construct  an  adsorption  energy  distribution  for  each  bulk  candidate.  The  same  slab 

construction,  adsorbate  placement,  redundancy  filtering,  and  adsorption  energy  evaluatio n

procedures  were  applied  to  both  Materials  Project -retrieved  and  MatterGen -generated  bulk 

candidates.  These  candidate  types  differed  only  in  the  source  from  which  their  initial  bulk 

structures  were  obtained. References 

1.  Jain,  A.;  Ong,  S.  P.;  Hautier,  G.;  Chen,  W.;  Richards,  W.  D.;  Dacek,  S.;  Cholia,  S.; 

Gunter,  D.;  Skinner,  D.;  Ceder,  G.;  Persson,  K.  A.  Commentary:  The  Materials  Project: 

A materials  genome  approach  to  accelerating  materials  innovation.  APL  Mater.  2013 ,

1, 011002.  DOI:  10.1063/1.4812323. 

2.  Ong,  S.  P.;  Richards,  W.  D.;  Jain,  A.;  Hautier,  G.;  Kocher,  M.;  Cholia,  S.;  Gunter,  D.; 

Chevrier,  V.  L.;  Persson,  K.  A.;  Ceder,  G.  Python  Materials  Genomics  (pymatgen):  A

robust,  open -source  Python  library  for  materials  analysis.  Comput . Mater.  Sci.  2013 ,

68 , 314 –319.  DOI:  10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.10.028. 

3.  Larsen,  A.  H.;  Mortensen,  J.  J.;  Blomqvist,  J.;  Castelli,  I.  E.;  Christensen,  R.;  Dułak, 

M.;  Friis,  J.;  Groves,  M.  N.;  Hammer,  B.;  Hargus,  C.;  et  al.  The  Atomic  Simulation 

Environment —a Python  library  for  working  with  atoms.  J.  Phys.:  Condens.  Matter 

2017 , 29 , 273002.  DOI:  10.1088/1361 -648X/aa680e. 

4.  Chanussot,  L.;  Das,  A.;  Goyal,  S.;  Lavril , T.;  Shuaibi,  M.;  Riviere,  M.;  Tran,  K.; 

Heras -Domingo,  J.;  Ho,  C.;  Hu,  W.;  et  al.  Open  Catalyst  2020  (OC20)  dataset  and 

community  challenges.  ACS  Catal.  2021 , 11 , 6059 –6072.  DOI: 

10.1021/acscatal.0c04525. 

5.  Wood,  B.  M.;  Dzamba,  M.;  Fu,  X.;  Gao,  M.;  Shuaibi,  M.;  Barroso -Luque,  L.; 

Abdelmaqsoud,  K.;  Gharakhanyan,  V.;  Kitchin,  J.  R.;  Levine,  D.  S.;  et  al.  UMA:  A

family  of  universal  models  for  atoms.  arXiv  2025 , arXiv:2506.23971.  DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.23971. 

6.  van  den  Oord,  A.;  Li,  Y.;  Vinyals , O.  Representation  learning  with  contrastive 

predictive  coding.  arXiv  2018 , arXiv:1807.03748.  DOI:  10.48550/arXiv.1807.03748. 

7.  Loshchilov,  I.;  Hutter,  F.  Decoupled  weight  decay  regularization.  In  International 

Conference  on  Learning  Representations ; 2019. 

8.  Mok,  D.  H.;  Na,  J.;  Back,  S.  Toward  controllable  catalyst  inverse  design  via  large -

scale  autoregressive  pretraining.  arXiv  2026 , arXiv:2606.17445.  DOI: 

10.48550/arXiv.2606.17445. 

9.  Yang,  J.;  Ye,  K.;  Xie,  S.;  Li,  Q.;  Milhans , C.;  Liu,  F.;  Che,  F.  Diffusion  model -guided 

inverse  design  of  bimetallic  catalysts  for  ammonia  decomposition.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc. 

2026 , 148 , 537 –546.  DOI:  10.1021/jacs.5c14652. 

10.  Zeni,  C.;  Pinsler,  R.;  Zügner,  D.;  Fowler,  A.;  Horton,  M.;  Fu,  X.;  Wang,  Z.; 

Shysheya,  A.;  Crabbé,  J.;  Ueda,  S.;  et  al.  A generative  model  for  inorganic  materials 

design.  Nature  2025 , 639 , 624 –632.  DOI:  10.1038/s41586 -025 -08628 -5. 

11.  Kresse,  G.;  Furthmüller , J.  Efficient  iterative  schemes  for  ab  initio  total -energy 

calculations  using  a plane -wave  basis  set.  Phys.  Rev.  B 1996 , 54 , 11169 –11186.  DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.54.11169. 

12.  Perdew,  J.  P.;  Burke,  K.;  Ernzerhof,  M.  Generalized  gradient  approximation  made 

simple.  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  1996 , 77 , 3865 –3868.  DOI:  10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865. 

13.  Kresse,  G.;  Joubert,  D.  From  ultrasoft  pseudopotentials  to  the  projector  augmented -

wave  method.  Phys.  Rev.  B 1999 , 59 , 1758 –1775.  DOI:  10.1103/PhysRevB.59.1758. 

14.  Deshpande,  S.;  Maxson,  T.;  Greeley,  J.  Graph  theory  approach  to  determine 

configurations  of  multidentate  and  high  coverage  adsorbates  for  heterogeneous 

catalysis.  npj  Comput.  Mater.  2020 , 6, 79.  DOI:  10.1038/s41524 -020 -0345 -2.